Iran:  Continued harassment of trade-unionists ahead of International Labour Day
April 30, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Iran / 2015 / AprilIran: Continued harassment of trade-unionists ahead of International Labour DayIran_2015.04.30_Joint4 pages / 327 KB

Paris-Geneva, April 30,
2015 - On the eve of the International Labour Day 2015, the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (FIDH-OMCT) and the Iranian League for the
Defence of Human Rights (LDDHI) deplore the ongoing harassment of
trade-unionists in Iran.
Over the past two days, several
leading independent unionists have been arrested in Iran: Messrs. Mahmood
Salehi, founding member of Bakers Association in the City of Saqqez and Osman
Esmaeili, spokesperson of the Committee for Defending Imprisoned Labour
Activists in Mahabad, were both arrested on April 28; Mr. Pedram Nasrollahi,
member of the Coordinating Committee to Help Form Workers’ Organisations, was
detained in Sanandaj on April 29; and Messrs. Ebrahim Madadi and Davood
Razavi, respectively deputy president and Board member of the Syndicate of
the United Bus Company of Tehran and Suburbs (known as ‘Sherkat Vahed’),
were arrested in Tehran early in the morning on April 29. Messrs. Madadi and
Razavi are believed to be in detention in Ward 209 of Evin prison, which is
under the administration of the Ministry of Intelligence[1].

On the
other hand, Mr. Jafar Azimzadeh, secretary of Board of Directors of the Free
Union of Iranian Workers (FUIW), was summoned to the Ministry of Intelligence
on 29 April. He was released after several hours of questioning about “the
joint resolution of independent unions for May 1” and a big rally the FUIW
organised in front the Parliament on 28 April. During the rally, which several
hundred retired teachers also joined, the participants had echoed the
resolution’s demands, and finally formally submitted it to the Parliament after
it was read out by one of the organisers.
These arrests came in the wake of
public statements issued by a number of independent unions this past week, in
which they outlined their grievances and demands. In the 17-point “joint
resolution of independent workers’ groups and organisations for May 1, 2015”, which
seven groups[2]
signed, the unions called on the government to:   
-       
raise the government-set minimum wage for the
current year by almost four times to cover the costs of living and to match the
poverty line;
-       
lift restrictions on forming independent workers’
organisations;
-       
allow unconditional freedom of assembly,
expression and opinion, especially for parties and the press, including for the
organisation of strikes and protests ; 
-       
provide job security through full coverage of
the Labour Code for all workers; 
-       
raise the safety standards employers must
provide for workers; 
-       
abolish discriminatory laws against women and
establish full equality of men and women;
-       
abolish the death penalty and flogging;
-       
abolish all the laws discriminating against
women;
-       
abolish child labour;
-       
release all political prisoners, and imprisoned
workers and stop judicial prosecutions against them;
-       
designate May 1 as a public holiday and lift all
restrictions on its celebration.
 
While the latest arrests are
believed to be aimed at preventing the free and independent celebration of May
1, independent unionists and unions have already been facing great pressure
over the past year, largely because of the growing protests and strikes at
different factories and plants across the country . By some accounts, there
have been more than 360 strikes, demonstrations and other forms of protest
organised in the past 12 months against layoffs and demanding timely payment of
wages, wage increases, and improvements in contracts and working conditions.
The authorities have been
frequently summoning and threatening a number of labour activists over the past
few months, while several  others have
been arrested. Some of them have been released after a month or two in detention
and are likely to be tried soon. In such cases, unionists are most often
charged with offences such as acting against national security, spreading
propaganda against the State, insulting the Leader etc. 
As of April 30, 2015, at least
25 unionists were serving prisons terms after grossly unfair trials, or were
otherwise detained in Evin prison (Tehran), Rajaishahr prison (near Karaj),
Mahabad prison, and Sanandaj prison (western Iran) awaiting trial. 
Unionists in detention, for
unclear reasons, in addition to the five individuals detained on April 28 and
29, include:
-     
six members of the Coordinating Committee to
Help Form Workers’ Organisations (CCHFWO) arrested in the western city of
Sanandaj in March and April: Reza Amjadi (arrested April 25), Hamed
Mahmoodnejad (arrested April 18), Aram Zandi and Fuad Zandi (both
arrested April 14), Nezam Sadeghi (arrested April 8), and Kurosh
Bakhshandeh (arrested March 7). 
-     
In addition, Mr. Saeed Shirzad, another
labour and child rights activist, was arrested in the North-Western city of
Tabriz on June 2, 2014 and spent two months in solitary confinement. He has
been transferred to Rajaishahr prison, but has not been tried yet.
There are at least 13
unionists who have been convicted of crimes related to their work defending
labour rights and are currently serving prison terms[3],
including:
-     
Mr. Reza Shahabi Zakaria, Treasurer of
the Syndicate of Workers of United Bus Company of Tehran (serving a 6 year
prison sentence);
-     
Messrs. Shahrokh Zamani and Mohammad
Jarrahi, two members of CPELU and founding members of the Painters and
Decorators Union (serving 11.5 years and 5 years imprisonment respectively); 
-     
Messrs. Yousef Ab-Kharabat, Vahed
Seyedeh, and Ribvar Abdollahi, members of the CCHFWO (serving 2
years, 2 years and 1 year respectively); 
-     
Messrs. Mahmood Bagheri and Abdolreza
Ghabari, two members of the TAI (sentenced to 4.5 years and 15 years
respectively). 
-     
Mr. Alireza Hashemi, secretary-general of
Iranian Teachers Organisation, was convicted in 2010 to 5 years in prison on
charges of “acting against national security” and “spreading propaganda against
the State,” but he was never summoned to prison to serve his sentence. On April
19, 2015, Mr. Hashemi was finally arrested in Tehran in order to serve his
prison sentence. The authorities apparently decided to implement his sentence
in the wake of massive demonstrations of teachers demanding a pay rise in front
of the Parliament in the capital Tehran as well as outside the Education
Departments of numerous cities in late March 2015. 
-     
Ms. Manijeh Sadeghi, women’s rights,
child rights, and labour activist, was arrested in Sanandaj on 30 March to
serve a 91-day prison sentence.
-     
Mr. Behnam (Assad) Ebrahimzadeh, a member
of the Committee to Pursue the Establishment of Labour Unions (CPELU) and a
child rights activist, is serving a five-year prison sentence since June 2010[4].

-     
Mr. Rassoul Bodaghi, Board member of
Teachers Association of Iran (TAI), is serving a 6-year prison sentence in
Rajaishahr prison, 
-     
Mr. Mehdi Farahi-Shandiz, a member of
the CPELU and of the TAI, was serving a three-year
prison sentence which he completed in late October 2014, but the authorities
refused to release him.
Of the above imprisoned
unionists, some have been facing further judicial harassment while in prison:
-       
Mr. Behnam (Assad) Ebrahimzadeh is
suffering from neck and back problems and suffered internal bleeding in late
March. Officials of Rajaishahr prison have transferred him to a prison ward for
common criminals, contrary to the provisions of the Prison Code. In December
2014, Mr. Ebrahimzadeh was notified that he faced an additional 9 years and 4.5
months in prison for charges including contacts with UN Special Rapporteur
Ahmed Shaheed, and contacts with an opposition group abroad, the latter of
which he has denied in absolute terms.
-       
Mr. Rassoul Bodaghi is slated to complete
his prison sentence and be released in about three months. He was summoned by a
judge on April 25 and April 26, where he was informed of new complaints filed
against him by the Prosecutor’s Office and the Ministry of Intelligence. He was
warned that those complaints could be retracted ‘if he announced in an
interview his withdrawal from activities of teachers. On April 26, Mr. Bodaghi
was transferred from his cell to an unknown location and his whereabouts were
still unknown as of April 30.
-       
Mr. Mehdi Farahi-Shandiz was not
released when his prison sentence was completed in late October 2014. On
January 3, 2015 he was tried for allegedly
“insulting the Leader“ and was sentenced to another prison sentence of three
years.
Other unionists, who have been
sentenced to prison terms or other punishments for their work defending labour
rights, include:
-       
Messrs Yadollah Samadi and Eghbal
Shabani, members of CCHFWO and Board members of Bakers Association of
Sanandaj and Suburbs, were sentenced to 30 lashes in late March, and a
five-month prison sentence against them was suspended for five years.  Another CCHFWO member, Mr. Mehrdad
Amin-Vaziri, was said to have been sentenced to imprisonment of 5 years and
91 days. In March 2015, Mr. Jafar Azimzadeh, secretary of the Board of
Directors of the Free Union of Iranian Workers, was sentenced to six years
imprisonment and a two year ban on all kinds of activities, on charges of
“acting against national security” and “spreading propaganda against the
State.” Mr. Jamil Mohammadi, another member of the same Union, was
sentenced to three years and six months imprisonment and a fine on charges of
“acting against national security”. They are waiting for the outcome of their
appeals.
-       
Mr. Khaled Hosseini, member of CCHFWO, and
two senior members of the TAI, Messrs. Ali-Akbar Baghani, and Mahmood
Beheshti-Langaroudi, have been sentenced to prison terms and are awaiting
the outcome of their appeals.
-       
Prison sentences have also been upheld against
several members of the CCHFWO, who are at risk of arrest: Messrs. Hassan
Rassoulnejad (sentenced to 1 year), Jamal Minashiri and Hadi
Tanoumand (sentenced to 3.5 years each), Ghassem Mostafapour, Ebrahim
Mostafapour and Mohammad Karimi (sentenced to 2 years each). 
 
The Observatory and LDDHI call upon the Iranian authorities to release
immediately and unconditionally all the above-mentioned unionists, as their
detentions are arbitrary and appear only aimed at sanctioning their legitimate
human rights activities. The Observatory and LDDHI also call on the Iranian
authorities to put an end to any kind of harassment - including at the judicial
level – against the above-menbtioned unionists and any other human rights
defenders in Iran.
 
For more information, please contact:
·       FIDH: Arthur
Manet/Lucie Kroening: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
·       OMCT: Miguel Martín
Zumalacárregui: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 24



[1]    Messrs. Madadi, Razavi, Salehi, and
Nasrollahi have been detained or served prison terms in previous years and been
addressed in Observatory press releases and Urgent Appeals, e.g. Urgent Appeal
of December 21, 2007, and Press Release of December 2, 2011, UA of July 6, 2012


[2]   These are: Free Union of Iranian Workers
(FUIW), Kermanshah Electrical and Metal Workers Association, Syndicate of
Workers of Haft-Tappeh Cane Sugar Company, Alborz Province Painters and
Decorators Union, Defenders of Workers Rights Centre, Committee to Pursue the
Establishment of Labour Unions (CPELU), and Coordinating Committee to Help Form
Workers’ Organisations (CCHFWO). The largest independent union, Syndicate of
Workers of the United Bus Company of Tehran and Suburbs, with a reported
membership of half of the company’s workforce, i.e. nearly 10,000, issued a
separate resolution, which largely concentrated on economic and the Syndicate’s
specific issues. 


[3]    For more information and cases of other
unionists, see the Observatory Urgent Appeal of January 23, 2015


[4]                
For more information and cases of other unionists, see the
Observatory Urgent Appeal of January 23, 2015, and the Observatory Press
Release of April 30, 2014. 