India:  Abduction, arbitrary detention, ill-treatment and judicial harassment of Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar
September 30, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / India / 2015 / SeptemberIndia: Abduction, arbitrary detention, ill-treatment and judicial harassment of Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar



URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
New
information
IND 004 / 1114 / OBS 091.2
Arbitrary arrest /
Judicial harassment / Torture
India
September 30, 2015
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human
Rights (FIDH), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in India. 
New
information:
The Observatory has been
informed by Banglar Manabadhikar Suraksha Mancha (MASUM) of the abduction of
Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar, a District Human Rights Monitor for
MASUM in Murshidabad district (West Bengal, India). He is a renowned human
rights defender who has investigated cases on human rights violations perpetrated
by the police and Border Security Forces (BSF) personnel, and who has been
instrumental in denouncing several other human rights violations in Murshidabad
district.
According to the information
received, on September 22, 2015 at 10.27 am, Mr. Sarkar was abducted in
Sekhpara (West Bengal, India) by five to
seven police officers from the Islampur police station who
were not wearing their uniform. At the time of the incident, Mr. Sarkar was
talking with victims of torture and their family members when, all of a sudden,
the police officers arrived in a car and started beating and insulting him
after which they lifted him, placed him inside the vehicle and took him away. 
On September 23, 2015, at
1.38 pm, Mr. Sarkar was taken before the Additional District and Sessions Judge
(2nd Court)[1]
in Baharampur-Murshidabad and a criminal case was opened
against him under Sections 376, 511, 323, 506 and 400 of the Indian Criminal
Code and under Sections 8 and 12 of the Act for Protection of Children from
Sexual Offences Act. During the arrest he was slapped, kicked and pounced on
the chest as well as verbally abused. He was not permitted to have his medicine
and he was not given food at night. 
Furthermore he was obliged to
walk barefoot and was brought before the Court in this condition. At 6.15 pm on
the same day, a petition for bail was rejected and Mr. Sarkar was then
transferred to the prison Baharampur Central Correctional Home. The next
hearing is scheduled for October 7, 2015. 
According to the same information, the police has been trying to silence
Mr. Sarkar´s voice and that of MASUMs since they got
involved in a criminal case lodged against the police personnel for the alleged
killing of Mr. Rajib Molla at Raninagar police station. 
MASUM has filed several complaints and has been regularly sharing
information with the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC). Regarding
previous incidents with Mr. Sarkar and other MASUM members, the Focal Point on
Human Rights Defenders (HRDs) at the NHRC called MASUM and informed them that
they had taken up the case and sought report from the related police and civil
administration, but up to this date no documents have been shared with MASUM
and no appropriate action has been taken. The last complaint was made on
September 2, 2015 regarding previous incidents, just before his arrest. On
September 22, 2015, MASUM made a brief complaint with a request for urgent
steps from the NHRC and contacted the Focal Point of NHRC on HRDs, but, at the
time of publication of this urgent appeal, no actions have been taken to check the
allegations of police abuse upon Mr. Sarkar.
The Observatory recalls that
it is not the first time Mr. Sarkar is being intimidated, judicially harassed
and ill-treated at the hands of the police (see background information).
The Observatory is deeply
concerned for the allegations of ill-treatment and for the fact that Mr. Sarkar
was not brought in front of a court within 24 hours from his arrest as required
under the Constitution of India. The Observatory is also worried by the reports
of a lack of due diligence displayed by the Indian National Human Rights
Commission to follow up this case.
The Observatory condemns the
arbitrary arrest of Mr. Sarkar, as well as the charges against him, which seem
to be aimed at punishing him for his legitimate and peaceful human rights
activities, and calls on the Indian authorities to put an end to the ongoing
and persistent attempts to criminalise members of MASUM in contravention of its
international engagements regarding the protection of human rights defenders.
Background
information:
On November 21, 2014, law
enforcement agents from the Raninagar Police Station arrested Mr.
Sarkar at his place of residence and subsequently transferred him to
the ACJM Court, Lalbagh, on November 22. Mr. Sarkar was reportedly arrested
pursuant to an arrest warrant for a previous pending criminal case under the
Passport Act.
Case No. 364/2013, dated June
5, 2013, was brought against Mr. Sarkar by Mr. Char Mourasi, B.O.P. ‘C’ Company
of 130 Battalion of the BSF under Section 12 of the Passport Act of 1967 (GR
1738/2013). On May 20, 2014, Mr. Sarkar filed an application before the ACJM
Court, Lalbagh, expressing his concern that he had been falsely implicated in
an unknown criminal case by the police and the BSF, and requesting more details
about such case. However, until the arrest, Mr. Sarkar did not receive any
information about the status of the said criminal case, neither did he receive
any summons from the police nor the court.
According to the same
information, Mr. Rana Mohanta, Mr. Sarkar’s defense counsel, reported that his
client was assaulted, abused and mistreated by the police during his arrest as
well as in custody. Upon hearing his testimony the Court ordered that Mr.
Sarkar be released on bail and that he undergo a medical examination under
supervision of the Inspector of the General Record Office (GRO) of the ACJM
Court, Lalbagh. The Medical Officer of Lalbagh Sub Divisional hospital examined
Mr. Sarkar and advised that he be admitted to hospital, suspecting that his
ribs were fractured due to having been kicked and punched while in police
custody. 
On November 23,
2014, Mr.
Sarkar’s son filed a complaint to the local
Police Superintendent urging the police to carry out an investigation into the
beatings his father had been subjected to while in police custody. However, to this date there is no information regarding an enquiry or
investigation following the complaint.
Mr. Sarkar was
admitted to Behrampore General Hospital on November 27, 2014, for medical treatment following the injuries suffered in custody, and on
November 28, 2014, he was taken to Kolkata for advanced medical treatment. On
November 29, 2014, he underwent Psychiatric counselling; the medical report
stated that he had several injuries such as a suspected fractured rib, as well
as post traumatic stress, a feeling of humiliation, intense anxiety, fear and a
feeling of sadness and helplessness. He suffered from insomnia and his doctors
expressed their concern that the attack could have long-term effects on his
psychological health. Mr. Sarkar went to Calcutta Medical College and Hospital
for further treatment on December 3, 2014. To this date, Mr. Sarkar is still
undergoing physiotherapy sessions.
The judicial harassment against Mr. Sarkar
and other MASUM members is ongoing. Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar was previously
implicated in Raninagar Police Station Case No. 354/2013 and Domkal Police
Station Case No. 1243/2014. The cases are ongoing after a Criminal Revision at
Calcutta High Court was filed for quashing the criminal case pending against
Mr. Sarkar at Raninagar Police Station and another Criminal Revision was filed
for quashing of the criminal case which is pending at Domkal Police Station, in
which Mr. Sarkar and Mr. Kirity Roy, Secretary of MASUM, have been made
accused. 
Actions
requested:
Please write to the authorities in India, urging them to:
i.    Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar as well
as of all human rights defenders in India;
ii.    
Release Mr. Ajimuddin
Sarkar immediately and unconditionally, since his detention is arbitrary
as it only seems to be aimed at sanctioning his human rights activities;
iii.   
Carry out an immediate, thorough, impartial and transparent
investigation into the abovementioned events in order to identify all those
responsible, bring them before an independent tribunal, and sanction them as
provided by the law; 
iv.    Put
an end to all acts of harassment - including at the judicial level - against
Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar and
all members of MASUM as well as against all human rights defenders in
India so that they are able to carry out their work without hindrances;
v.    
Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998,
especially: 
-      
Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and
in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”; and
-      
Article 12.2, which provides that “"the State shall take all
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence,
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination,
pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her
legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”; and
 
vi.   More
generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments ratified by
India.
Addresses:
·        
Mr. Shri Nanredra Damodardas Modi, Prime Minister of India, Prime Minister’s Office, Room number 152,
South Block, New Delhi, India. Fax: + 91 11 2301 6857. E-mail: pmosb@pmo.nic.in / manmo@sansad.in
·        
Mr. Raj Nath Singh, Union Minister
of Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, 104-107 North Block, New
Delhi 110 001 India, Fax: +91 11 2309 2979
·        
Justice Rajendra Mal Lodha, Chief Justice of India, Supreme Court, Tilak Marg, New Delhi
-1, India. Fax: +91 11 233 83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.in
·        
Justice K. G. Balakrishnan, Chairperson of the National Human
Rights Commission of India, Manav
Adhikar Bhawan Block-C, GPO Complex, INA, New Delhi - 110023, India. Fax +91
11 2465 1329. Email: covdnhrc@nic.in; ionhrc@nic.in
·        
Mr. A. K. Parashar, Focal Point on Human Rights Defenders, National
Human Rights Commission, Faridkot House, Copernicus Marg, New Delhi 110 001,
India. Email: hrd-nhrc@nic.in
·        
Miss Mamata Banerjee, Chief Minister, Chief Minister of West Bengal, 325, Sarat Chatterjee Rd, Shibpur,
Howrah, West Bengal 711102, Telephone: +91 33
2214-5555, 2214-3101 
Fax: +91 33 2214-3528  E-mail: cm@wb.gov.in 
·        
H.E. Mr. Dilip Sinha, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of India to the
United Nations (Geneva), Rue du Valais 9, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22
906 86 96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
·        
Embassy of India in Brussels, 217 Chaussée de
Vleurgat, 1050 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 6489638 / +32 2 6451869
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of India in your
respective country.
Geneva-Paris, September 30, 2015
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory, a OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human
Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.

 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33
(0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
Tel and fax OMCT +
     41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
 
 



[1]                
This Court is a designated Special Court for the Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances Act (NDPS Act) and  the Protection of Children from Sexual
Offences Act (POCSO Act). 