Egypt:  Bloggers Alaa Abdel-Fatah and Maikel Nabil finally released, but freedom of expression of human rights activists still at risk!
February  6, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2012 / FebruaryEgypt: Bloggers Alaa Abdel-Fatah and Maikel Nabil finally released, but freedom of expression of human rights activists still at risk!

THE OBSERVATORY FOR THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS 
- EMHRN
 
PRESS RELEASE
 
EGYPT: Bloggers Alaa Abdel-Fatah and Maikel Nabil finally 
released, but freedom of expression of human rights activists still at 
risk!
 
Paris-Geneva-Copenhagen, February 6, 2012. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a 
joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the 
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), and the Euro-Mediterranean Human 
Rights Network (EMHRN) welcome the release of blogger Maikel Nabil on January 
24, 2012, which follows the release of another blogger, Mr. Alaa Abdel-Fatah, on 
December 25, 2011.
 
On January 24, 2012, following ten months of arbitrary detention, 
blogger Maikel Nabil, who had been arrested on March 28, 2011 for allegedly “insulting 
the army” and “disseminating false information” after he denounced human rights 
violations during the Egyptian Revolution, was released following an amnesty 
declared by the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces at the occasion of the first 
anniversary of the Revolution. He had been sentenced on April 10, 2011 to two 
years' imprisonment by a military court. 
 
Mr. Alaa Abdel-Fatah had been arrested on October 30, 2011 and interrogated on his 
involvement in the October 9 demonstration of Coptic-Christians held before the 
Maspero building downtown Cairo, which was severely repressed by the military, 
resulting in 27 dead. Accused of “unlawful assembly”, “vandalism” and “resisting 
arrest”, he was released by a decision of the State High Security 
Court.
 
Mr. Abdel-Fatah had criticised that the Military Prosecution was responsible for investigating the 
Maspero clashes, in which the military police would be involved and opposed to 
the trial of civilians before military courts. On October 20, 2011, Mr. Abdel-Fatah signed an article in the 
newspaper al-Shourouk in which he described the acts of violence 
perpetrated by the military and narrated the two days he spent in the Coptic 
Hospital Mortuary after the repression.
 
“The release of Alaa Abdel-Fatah and Maikel Nabil are positive steps 
which should not overshadow the regular acts of harassment, including detention, 
faced by human rights bloggers and activists in Egypt, as well as the crackdown 
on civil society organisations in the country, one year after the 
Revolution”, FIDH President Souhayr Belhassen said.
 
“The release of Alaa Abdel-Fatah and Maikel Nabil are no doubt to be welcomed. But 
they need to be followed by a fundamental change by the authorities. Rather than 
threatening their work with possible prosecutions we finally have to see 
concrete moves in creating an environment that enables and secures human rights 
defenders' vital work for society”, added OMCT Secretary General Gerald 
Staberock.
 
“Accordingly, we call upon the Egyptian authorities to put an end to any kind of 
harassment - including at the judicial level - against all human rights 
defenders and organisations in Egypt, and more generally to conform to the United Nations Declaration on 
Human Rights Defenders, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and 
international human rights instruments ratified by Egypt”, concluded EMHRN President Kamel Jendoubi.
 
For further information, please 
contact:
·         
FIDH: Karine Appy / Arthur Manet, + 33 1 43 55 25 
18
·         OMCT: 
Delphine Reculeau, + 41 22 809 49 39
·         EMHRN: 
Shaimaa Abou Elkhir, +20 100 1077 207 