Sudan: arbitrary detention and torture of seven men by army bodies
July  6, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2004 / JulySudan: Sudan: arbitrary detention and torture of seven men by army bodiesCase SDN 060704 Arbitrary Detention / Torture  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sudan.  Brief description of the situation The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudanese Organisation Against Torture (SOAT), a member of the OMCT network, of the arbitrary detention and torture of seven men in Bouram town, Southern Darfur state, on suspicion of joining the armed opposition.  According to the information received, the following persons : 1.	Babikir Abdel Rasoul, a merchant from Bouram; 2.	Ali Mohamed Adam, a farmer from Bouram; 3.	Adam Hassan, a merchant from Nyala; 4.	Adam Mahmoud Neddi, a merchant from Nyala; 5.	Mustafa Bilal, a merchant from Nyala; 6.	Dahub Joumaa Sinja, a lorry driver from Nyala; 7.	Moudathir Mohamed Zain, an assistant in the lorry with Mr. Dahub;     were arrested on 12 June by the military intelligence and armed forces. Following their arrest, the seven men were detained in Bouram for 14 days. On 26 June 2004, they were transferred to Nyala Wasat (central) police station where they are currently being detained with no official charges facing them. It has been alleged that the seven men were subjected to torture while in security custody at Bouram. They were allegedly beaten with sticks on their hands and flogged with “Sots” (leather whips).   The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological of these seven persons.  Action requested Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:  i. take all measures necessary to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr Babikir Abdel Rasoul, Ali Mohamed Adam, Adam Hassan, Adam Mahmoud Neddi, Mustafa Bilal, Dahub Joumaa Sinja and Moudathir Mohamed Zain;  ii. order their immediate release in the absence of legal charges that are consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times;  iii. order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of their arrest and any allegations of torture and/or ill treatment, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  iv. guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.   Addresses  His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir,  President of the Republic of Sudan,  President' s Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan,  Fax: + 249 183 783223  Mr. Ali Mohamed Osman Yassin,  Minister of Justice and Attorney General,  Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan,  Fax: + 249 183 788941  Mr. Mustafa Osman Ismail,  Minister of Foreign Affairs,  Ministry of Foreign Affairs, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan,  Fax: + 249 183 779383   Dr. Abdelmuneim Osman Mohamed Taha,  Advisory Council for Human Rights, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan,  Fax: + 249 183 770883  His Excellency Ambassador Mr. Ibrahim Mirghani Ibrahim,  Permanent Mission of the Republic of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 335, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland,  Fax: +4122 731 26 56, E-mail: mission.sudan@ties.itu.int.   Please also write to the embassies of Sudan in your respective country. Geneva, 6 July 2004 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.   Click here for PDF version 