‘OMCT launches global initiative to mobilize civil society on implementing universal anti-torture standards’
April 30, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / 2014 / April‘OMCT launches global initiative to mobilize civil society on implementing universal anti-torture standards’Press Release_CAT2 pages / 85 KB
PRESS RELEASE
‘OMCT launches global initiative to mobilize civil
society on implementing universal anti-torture standards’
Geneva, 30 April 2014
The World Organisation Against Torture, the principal global civil
society coalition against torture, launches a new initiative to mobilize on the
implementation of the main UN anti-torture body (UNCAT).
The
Convention Against Torture remains the principal legal authority in the fight
against torture. While outlawed in law torture and ill-treatment remain however
common experiences around the world. The UN Committee Against Torture is the
principal anti-torture body charged with examining the compliance of state with
their obligations. The Committee has proven to be an important element in the
global fight against torture. Its authoritative recommendations can make a real
difference. However, in OMCTs daily work we see that the Committee continues to
face multiple challenges, such as late or non-reporting by states, a chronic
lack of implementation on the part of state parties to the Convention, and the
reluctance by states to disseminate and debate the results with openly with society
at home.
‘In the coming years we will undertake a
concerted effort with our global network to mobilize local actors on the
implementation of the Committees recommendations’, said Yves Berthelot,
OMCT President, on the occasion of a reception in honour of the 52session of
Committee Against Torture. ‘Ultimately we
will only succeed if we manage to generate local civil society support and build
real constituencies for change’, he added. 
OMCT
will support civil society access to the Committee’s proceedings including from
difficult countries, provide support, policy advise and mentoring to defenders
from the field. In addition we will implement new and innovative ways to ensure
that the reporting process is discussed in the countries concerned, and a
coherent and systematic follow-up to the Committee’s recommendation.
‘We all have a responsibility to ensure that
the legal obligations of the UN Convention of Torture do not only exist in law,
but trigger real change for people around the world threatened with violence
and torture’, noted Yves Berthelot.
OMCT
will conduct in depth and sustained advocacy on the implementation of the
Convention in six focus countries, including Bangladesh, Pakistan, Ivory Coast,
Togo, Mexico and Colombia. The initiative is implemented jointly with its
members of the SOS torture network in the six partner countries. It includes
authoritative research on torture, national consultations on legal reforms,
effective victims support and remedies and public outreach to generate support
for anti-torture reforms.
The OMCT wishes to express appreciation for those
supporting the program, notably through the financial support from the European
Union.
For further information,
please contact:
OMCT - Marina Gente,
+41(0) 22 809 49 27, mg@omct.org 