Iran:  Continued arbitrary detention of and denial of medical care to Mr. Reza Shahabi Zakaria / Judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of dozens of other trade unionists
July  3, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2014 / JulyIran: Continued arbitrary detention of and denial of medical care to Mr. Reza Shahabi Zakaria / Judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of dozens of other trade unionists

New information
IRN 004 / 0714 / OBS 061
Arbitrary detention / Judicial harassment /
Denial of medical care / Ill-treatment in
detention
Iran
July 3, 2014
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), has received new information and requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Iran.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been
informed by the League for the Defence of Human Rights in Iran (LDDHI) about
the continued arbitrary detention and denial of medical care to Mr. Reza
Shahabi Zakaria, Treasurer of the Syndicate of Workers of United Bus
Company of Tehran, who is serving a six-year prison sentence since June 2010 as
well as the judicial harassment, arbitrary detention and ill-treatment of
dozens of other trade unionists[1]. 
 
According to the
information received, on June 30, 2014, Mr. Reza Shahabi, who is currently
detained in Rajaishahr prison, was in pressing need for medical care. His
cellmates took him to the prison clinic but the clinic officials refused to
offer him the needed care and demanded him to end his hunger strike, which he
turned down. Mr. Shahabi has been on hunger strike since June 1, in protest to
his illegal transfer from Evin prison to Rajaishahr prison on the same day. In
a letter to the Prosecutor of Tehran province, dated June 14, Mr. Shahabi
stated that he felt he had no other recourse than to go on hunger strike and
demanded “to be returned to Evin prison; to be granted sick leave from prison
to receive medical care and disc operation” and the implementation of the
relevant provisions of the 2013 Islamic Penal Code that would make him eligible
for immediate release. 
 
The
Observatory recalls that at least 12 other labour activists and trade unionists
are currently in prison in Iran, and a number of others are facing long-term
prison sentences. Those 12 unionists include:
- three
members of the Committee to Pursue the Establishment of Labour Unions (CPELU),
Messrs. Shahrokh Zamani (serving a total of 11.5 years in prison),
Mohammad Jarrahi (5 years) - both also founding members of
the Painters’ and Decorators' Union, and Behnam (Assad) Ebrahimzadeh (5 years), also
a child rights activist; 
- at least
four members of the Coordinating Committee to Help Form Workers’ Organisations
(CCHFWO), Messrs. Yousef Ab-Kharabat (2 years), Mohammad Molanaei (1 year),
Vahed Seyedeh (2 years), and Afshin Nadimi (one year);

- and at
least five members of the Teachers’ Association of Iran (TAI), Messrs. Mahmood
Bagheri (4.5
years), Rassoul Bodaghi (6 years), Mohammad Davari (6 years),
Mehdi Farahi-Shandiz (3 years; also a member of the CPELU),
and Abdolreza Ghabari (15 years). 
- Another
labour and child rights activist, Mr. Saeed Shirzad, was detained in the
city of Tabriz, north-western Iran, on June 2 but the reasons for his detention
and his whereabouts are not known. 
 
Imprisoned
unionists regularly face different forms of harassment and are denied medical
care. Mr. Ebrahimzadeh, who had spent two weeks in solitary confinement after
being beaten up during the April 18 attack of prison guards against Ward 350 of
Evin prison, was transferred on May 3 to solitary cells of Intelligence
Ministry-run Ward 209 in Evin prison, where he was detained for nearly two
months. Furthermore, security forces harassed Mr. Ebrahimzadeh’s family on June
29 and searched the family house confiscating their computer and other equipment
as well as identity and banking documents. Furthermore, Mr. Farahi-Shandiz was
illegally transferred to Rajaishahr prison in mid June. Messrs. Shahabi,
Jarrahi and Molanaei are in pressing need of medical care, which they have been
consistently deprived of.
 
Furthermore,
prison sentences against Messrs Hassan Rassoulnejad, Jamal Minashiri,
Hadi Tanoumand, Ghassem Mostafapour, Ebrahim Mostafapour,
Mohammad Karimi, and Ghaleb Hosseini, all members of the CCHFWO,
have been upheld and they are likely to be arrested and sent to prison soon.
Some other members of the CCHFWO as well as some members of the TAI have also
been sentenced to prison terms and are awaiting the outcome of their appeals,
including Messrs
Vafa Ghaderi, Khaled Hosseini, Ali-Akbar Baghani, Mahmood
Beheshti-Langaroudi, and Alireza Hashemi. 
 
The Observatory expresses its deep concerns
about the ongoing detention and denial of medical care to Mr. Reza Shahabi as
well as about the harassment and imprisonment of the above-mentioned trade
unionists, who are punished only for exercising their
rights to freedom of speech, assembly and association, as enshrined in the
International Covenant for Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the
International Covenant for Civil and Political Rights to which Iran is a State
party, as well as the relevant conventions of the International Labour
Organisation.
 
The Observatory is
accordingly calling on the Iranian authorities to release all the above-mentioned trade unionists and to stop persecution of all trade unionists,
by dropping the charges against them and putting an end to the practice of
summoning, interrogating, and prosecuting unionists.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please
write to the Iranian authorities and ask them to:
 
i. Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Reza Shahabi
Zakaria, all
above-mentioned trade unionists as well as of all other human rights defenders in Iran;
 
ii. Provide
adequate medical care to Messrs. Shahabi, Jarrahi, Molanaei and all other imprisoned human rights defenders;
 
iii. Release immediately and unconditionally all
above-mentioned trade unionists and other human rights defenders detained in Iran
merely to sanction their human rights activities;
 
iv. Put
an end to any kind of harassment - including at the judicial level - against all above-mentioned trade unionists and all other human rights defenders in Iran and ensure in
all circumstances that they can carry out their activities without
any hindrances;
 
v. Conform
in all circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly,
in particular:
- its article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually
or in association with others, to promote the protection and realization of
human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international
levels”, 
- and its article 12.2 which provides that “the State shall take all
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence,
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise
of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”;  
 
vi. Ensure
in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Iran. 
 
Addresses:

· Leader of the
Islamic Republic, His Excellency Ayatollah Sayed Ali Khamenei, The Office of
the Supreme Leader, Shahid Keshvardoost St., Jomhuri Eslami Ave., Tehran,
Islamic Republic of Iran, Faxes: + 98 21 649 5880 / 21 774 2228, Email: info_leader@leader.ir; Twitter:
@khamenei_ir
· President Hassan
Rouhani, the Presidency, Palestine Avenue, Azerbaijan Intersection, Tehran,
Islamic Republic of Iran, Tel: +98 21 64451; Fax: + 98 21 649 5880; Email: media@rouhani.ir; Twitter: @HassanRouhani (English) and @Rouhani_ir (Persian). 
· Head of the
Judiciary, His Excellency Ayatollah Sadeq Larijani, Office of the Head of the
Judiciary, Pasteur Street, Vali Asr Avenue, south of Serah-e Jomhuri, Tehran,
Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: +98 21 879 6671 / +98 21 3 311 6567, Email: info@dadiran.ir; / info@dadgostary-tehran.ir / info@bia-judiciary.ir
· Minister of
Foreign Affairs, Mohammad Javad Zarif, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Sheikh
Abdolmajid Kushk-e Mesri Av, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax:
+98-21-66743149; matbuat@mfa.gov.ir
· Secretary
General, High Council for Human Rights, Mr. Mohammed Javad Larijani, [Care of]
Office of the Head of the Judicary, Pasteur St, Vali Asr Ave, South of Serah-e
Jomhouri, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Email: info@humanrights-iran.ir
· H.E.
Mr. Mohsen Naziri Asl, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Chemin du Petit-Saconnex 28, 1209 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22
7330203, Email: mission.iran@ties.itu.int
· H.E. Mr. Mahmoud
Barimani, Ambassador, Embassy of Iran in Brussels, 15 a avenue Franklin Roosevelt, 1050 Bruxelles, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 762
39 15. Email: secreteriat@iranembassy.be 
 
Please also write to
diplomatic representations of Iran in your respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva,
July 3, 2014
 
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.  
 
To contact the Observatory,
call the emergency line: 
·      
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1
43 55 18 80 
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22
809 49 29



[1]
See Observatory Press Release, April 30, 2014. 