Egypt:  Newly adopted NGO Bill to annihilate the human rights movement
November 18, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2016 / NovemberEgypt: Newly adopted NGO Bill to annihilate the human rights movement

PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

 Geneva-Paris,
November 18, 2016 – The Egyptian Parliament has approved a new NGO bill
which, should it come into force, will eradicate associations in the country,
said the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders today. Even
more restrictive than the one put forward in September, this new legislative
initiative is the latest attempt to crack down on civic space in Egypt. 
On November 15, 2016, the
Egyptian Parliament concluded the revision of the 89 articles of the new NGO
law, drafted by its Abdel Hadi el Qasabi, and adopted it. The new law, which
will replace Law No. 84/2002 on Associations and Foundations, contains
even more draconian provisions than the one proposed in September[1]
by the Cabinet and will close the remaining space for conducting human rights
work in Egypt. The law will now be referred to the State Council for legal review, and then it will
be sent back to the Parliament.
The Observatory is particularly
concerned about the attempt of the Egyptian Parliament to redefine authorised
field of action for civil society organisations as being necessarily determined
by the State’s agenda. In particular, Article 14 of the new law states that
NGOs will be only allowed to engage in activities that conform to national
development plans. Moreover, NGOs are not allowed to conduct work that may
cause harm to “national security”, “law and order”, “public morals”, or “public
health”, terms that are subject to the discretionary interpretation of
government agencies. In addition, public surveys, research and reports will
have to be reviewed by the Government and approved both before they are carried
out and also after, prior to their publication.
“The provisions included in this newly
adopted law leave no doubt about which role the Egyptian State wants civil
society to play in this new Egypt: none. By redefining the limits of civil
society, the Egyptian authorities are trying to create an illusion of national
order and security, while continuing to judicially harass NGOs and human rights
defenders” declared
Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General.
The new legal framework sets the
goal of NGO work as “to achieve their
purposes in the fields of development and social welfare to achieve social
development goals within the scope of the state plans and development needs and
priorities.” Thus, human rights work will not be a permissible activity
for NGOs. It will also require all NGOs to (re)-register under the new law,
regardless of their prior status. At the same time, the administrative
registration process is even more complex under this law, and practically bans
foreign funding, since under Article 24 the Government must explicitly authorise
all foreign funding applications. Any failure to comply will expose
organisations to judicial dissolution (Article 43). 
Moreover, foreign NGOs may only
operate in Egypt with the authorisation of the National Foreign NGO Regulatory
Agency, a body comprising representatives of different ministries including the
Interior and Defence, as well as security and intelligence officials. Finally,
Article 87 provides that any breach of the law shall be punishable by up to
five years in prison and a fine of up to one million Egyptian pounds (approx.
100,000 Euros). 
“All this shows a clear intention by the
authorities to isolate the Egyptian human rights movement from the rest of the
world, by cutting access to vital foreign funding, prohibiting the conduct of
activities by foreign NGOs in Egypt and multiplying restrictions against
Egyptian human defenders. If this law is approved, it will have a devastating
impact on Egypt’s vibrant civil society” added FIDH President, Dimitris
Christopoulos.
The Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997
by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of
this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression
against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the
European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international
civil society.
For 