Thailand:  Dismissal of charges against seven women environmental rights defenders and KRBKG members
April 20, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2018 / AprilThailand: Dismissal of charges against seven women environmental rights defenders and KRBKG members​New informationTHA
003 / 0717 / OBS 075.2
Acquittal
Thailand
April 20, 2018
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, has
received new information in the following situation in Thailand.
 
New
information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the dismissal of
charges against seven women environmental rights defenders, members of the Khon Rak Ban Kerd Group
(KRBKG), a community-based group committed to the defence of the local
environment from the negative impacts of an open-pit copper-gold mine, operated
by the Tungkum company in Thailand’s Loei Province[1].
 
According to the information
received, on April 19, 2018, the Loei Provincial Court dropped all pending charges
against Ms. Pornthip Hongchai, Ms. Viron Rujichaiyavat, Ms. Ranong Kongsaen, Ms. Mon Khunna, Ms. Suphat Khunna, Ms. Boonraeng
Srithong, and Ms. Lumplearn
Ruengrith. The seven KRBKG members were facing
criminal charges and more than five years in prison for
peacefully protesting against the local gold mine in November 2016 (see
background information). 
 
The Court
found the seven environmental defenders not guilty of violating the Public Assembly Act since the gathering of villagers and KRBKG members did not qualify as a public assembly as it was hosted
by the local administrative office. When rendering its
verdict, the Court further stated they had merely exercised their right to free expression, which is upheld by the
Constitution. 
 
The Observatory welcomes the dismissal of charges against Ms. Pornthip Hongchai, Ms. Viron Rujichaiyavat,
Ms. Ranong Kongsaen, Ms. Mon Khunna, Ms. Suphat Khunna, Ms. Boonraeng Srithong,
and Ms. Lumplearn Ruengrith, but firmly condemns the judicial harassment they
were subjected to with the aim to punish them for
their legitimate human rights activities. Moreover, the Observatory recalls that this case was only
one of the 21 criminal and civil complaints initiated against villagers in Loei
Province, 19 of which were filed by Tungkum. 
 
The Observatory calls upon the Thai authorities to end all forms of harassment - including at the
judicial level - against all human rights defenders
in Thailand so that they are able to
carry out their work without hindrance or fear of reprisals.
 
Background
information:
 
On March 8, 2017,
police in Wang Saphung District, Loei Province, charged the seven KRBKG members
for violating Article 309 of Thailand’s Criminal Code for
forcing local council members to cancel a scheduled meeting. In addition, Ms. Pornthip Hongchai,
one of KRBKG leaders and spokespersons, was charged under Articles 10 and 28 of the Public Assembly Act for failing to notify the
authorities about the protest. The case was then transferred to the Public
Prosecutor to decide whether to indict her based on the police
investigation.
 
On June 13, 2017, the police filed additional charges against the seven rights
defenders under Articles 8 and 24 of the Public Assembly Act for holding a
public gathering that blocks entries or disrupts service of government
agencies. The offense carries a maximum penalty of six months in prison and a 10,000
THB (258 EUR) fine, or both.
 
On June 27, 2017, the
Public Prosecutor again postponed the indictment of the seven KRBKG members. The
indictment was originally scheduled for May 25, 2017 but was postponed first to
June 27, 2017 and finally to July 25, 2017.
 
On July 25, 2017, the seven members of KRBKG were formally indicted by
the Loei Provincial Court Prosecutor under Articles 4, 8, 10, 27 and 28 of the
Public Assembly Act and Sections 83, 91 and 309 of the
Criminal Code. The seven defenders were briefly placed in the custody of the court while they awaited
indictment and a bail order. At around 2pm, the seven rights defenders were
granted temporary release without the requirement of a bail deposit but on the
condition that they report themselves to Loei
Provincial Court on any occasion when ordered by the
court until the trial was completed.
 
The seven were indicted for
their involvement in legitimate human rights activities on November 16, 2016,
when more than 200 KRBKG members and villagers marched from Ban Na Nong Bong
village to the Khao Laung Sub-District Administrative Council Office in Loei Province, and peacefully staged a peaceful sit-in protest in front of the
Council meeting room. The protest was aimed at demanding community
participation in the decision-making process ahead of a scheduled meeting of
the Council to decide whether to grant Tungkum permission to use forest land
for their mining operations. Members of the
Administrative Council ultimately called off the scheduled meeting due to the
protest and filed a
complaint with the police.
 
Actions requested:

Please write to the authorities of Thailand asking them to:
 
i. Immediately and unconditionally put an end to all acts of judicial
harassment - including at the judicial level - against all human rights
defenders in Thailand so that
they are able to carry out their peaceful and legitimate human rights
activities without any hindrance or fear of reprisals;
 
ii. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological
integrity of all human rights defenders in Thailand;

iii. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998,
especially its Articles 1 and Article 12.2;

iv. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Thailand.
 
Addresses:
 
·      
Gen
Prayuth Chan-ocha, Prime Minister of Thailand, Fax: +66 (0) 2 282 5131
·      
Mr.
Don Pramudwinai, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Thailand, Fax: +66 (0) 2
643 5320; Email: minister@mfa.go.th
·      
Mr.
Suwaphan Tanyuvardhna, Minister of Justice of Thailand, Fax: +66 (0) 2 953
0503
·      
Pol
Gen Chaktip Chaijinda, Commissioner-General of the Royal Thai Police, Fax:
+66 (0) 2 251 5956 / +66 (0) 2 251 8702
·      
Mr.
Wat Tingsamit, Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission of
Thailand, Email: help@nhrc.or.th
·      
H.E.
Mr. Thani Thongphakdi, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Thailand to the
United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: + 41 22 715 10 00 / 10 02;
Email: mission.thailand@ties.itu.int
·      
Embassy
of Thailand in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 648 30 66; Email: thaibxl@pophost.eunet.be
·      
Mr. Wichit Chiamwichitkun, Chief Executive Director and Chairman of the
Executive Board, Tongkah Harbour Public Company Limited (of which Tungkum Ltd.
is a subsidiary company), Bangkok, Thailand, Fax: +66 2 694 4420, +66 2 695 4901;
Email: info@tongkahharbour.com.
 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Thailand in
your respective country.

***
Geneva-Paris, April 20, 2018

Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal
in your reply. 

The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997
by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of
this programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against
human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union
Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil
society.




[1] Villagers from six communities near the mine formed the KRBKG in 2007 to
advocate for a clean environment and to oppose the mining operations. On March
7, 2016, the National Human Rights Commission of Thailand honoured women of the
KRBKG with a prestigious human rights defenders’ award for their role in
bringing attention to critical human rights problems in Thailand. 