Cambodia:  Joint Letter to Huruhiko Kuroda, President of Asian Development Bank, regarding the draft law threatening civil society in Cambodia
November 19, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2011 / NovemberCambodia: Joint Letter to Huruhiko Kuroda, President of Asian Development Bank, regarding the draft law threatening civil society in Cambodia
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights 
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights 
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), joins eight 
international human rights groups in an open letter to the  Asian Development 
Bank to urge it to convince the Government of Cambodia to withdraw the draft Law 
on Associations and NGOs.Cambodia: Joint Letter to Huruhiko Kuroda, 
President of Asian Development Bank, regarding the draft law threatening civil 
society in Cambodia
 
November 19, 2011 
 
Haruhiko Kuroda
President
Asian Development Bank
Metro Manila
Philippines
 
Re: Draft law threatening civil society in 
Cambodia
 
Dear President Kuroda:
 
We write to bring your immediate attention to Cambodia’s draft Law on 
Associations and NGOs (LANGO). The draft law poses a serious threat to civil 
society’s freedom of association and freedom of expression as it contains broad 
and vague provisions that could be used to arbitrarily deny registration or 
close NGOs or associations. The ADB should convince the Cambodian authorities to 
immediately withdraw the draft law.
 
The implications of the third version of the draft law could not be 
more serious because it requires all associations and organizations to register 
before they are permitted to conduct any activities in 
Cambodia.
 
In a recent statement from the Office of the High Commissioner for 
Human Rights criticizing the draft law, Maina Kiai, UN Special Rapporteur on the 
rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association, noted that mandatory 
registration schemes and prohibiting activities by unregistered groups clearly 
infringe on the right to freedom of association. Mr. Kiai also highlighted that 
“legal status is not necessary for the enjoyment of the right to freedom of 
association.”
 
The UN Special Rapporteur on the right to freedom of opinion and 
expression, Frank La Rue, and the UN Special Rapporteur on the situation of 
human rights defenders, Margaret Sekaggya, who co-signed the statement, joined 
Mr. Kiai in calling for changes to bring the draft law in line with 
international standards.
 
Many governments, including the United States, Great Britain, Sweden, 
Australia, and Switzerland have publicly and privately expressed concerns about 
the draft law and its likely negative impacts on civil society and freedom of 
association.
 
The LANGO’s requirement that all associations and organizations seek 
prior registration approval violates the rights to freedom of association and 
expression enshrined in Cambodia’s Constitution. It also poses a direct threat 
to Articles 19 and 22 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights (ICCPR), which Cambodia has ratified. Indeed, the UN Human Rights 
Committee, charged with monitoring compliance with the ICCPR, has stated 
unequivocally that prior authorization schemes for NGO conduct are inconsistent 
with the treaty. Requiring prior approval through mandatory registration 
also creates a situation ripe for abuse and arbitrary 
decision-making.
 
On October 27, Mey Narath, a Ministry of Interior official, stated at 
a seminar in Phnom Penh that the government will respond to concerns about 
mandatory registration in a still yet to be released fourth draft of the law. 
Obviously until that draft of the law is provided to civil society groups, it 
will not be possible to assess whether any substantive changes have been made to 
address the very serious concerns outlined above. Importantly, even if 
registration is changed to not be “mandatory,” there should not be other 
punitive provisions for un-registered NGOs, community organizations, and civil 
society networks, such as an inability to open bank accounts, receive funds from 
domestic or foreign sources, or enter into contractual 
arrangements.
 
The Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) recently took actions that 
clearly demonstrate its intent in controlling NGOs. On August 2, the Ministry of 
Interior sent a letter to local NGO Sahmakum Teang Tnaut (STT), ordering its 
suspension for five months. Subsequently, the RGC issued formal warnings to two 
other rights groups: Bridges Across Borders Cambodia, and NGO Forum on Cambodia. 
A third group, Housing Rights Task Force, was also threatened by the government. 
The extralegal suspension and multiple warnings have since been directly 
connected to the four organizations’ work studying the impact of 
government-sponsored development projects. 
 
The ADB has worked with civil society in over three quarters of its 
projects. As ADB has noted, this collaboration has increased the “effectiveness, 
quality, and sustainability of its operations.” Civil society actors have 
assumed an increasingly vital role in the country’s development through 
monitoring, documentation, community relations, provision of social services, 
poverty alleviation, humanitarian outreach, research, and 
advocacy.
 
If enacted, the LANGO threatens to prevent Cambodia’s civil society 
groups from fulfilling this role. Efforts that appear critical to the 
government, including in relation to transparency and accountability, may be 
curtailed, limiting further any independent monitoring of the government, in a 
country with little independent media and a weak opposition. Decreased 
independent scrutiny may have a direct impact on the ability of development 
partners such as ADB to implement their programs 
effectively.
 
While we recognize that governments have a legitimate regulatory interest 
in the activities of non-profit entities, there is a real risk the provisions of 
the law be used to undermine freedom of association, expression, or assembly. 
The RGC already has a detailed legal framework for the registration and 
operation of non-profit entities in the new Civil Code, which will take effect 
in November 2011.
 
As such, we believe that Cambodia’s development partners should 
encourage the implementation of the Civil Code and other relevant Cambodian laws 
related to the regulation of non-profit entities, rather than the fundamentally 
flawed LANGO. In light of this, we urge you to:
Press the RGC to end efforts to promulgate this 
law.Make it clear to the RGC that if the law is adopted in its current 
form, you will be compelled to reassess your project funding and assistance with 
a particular emphasis on projects directly involving RGC 
agencies.

We thank you for your attention to this important 
matter.
 
Sincerely yours,
 
Brad Adams, Asia Director
Human Rights Watch
 
Souhayr Belhassen, President
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)
Brittis Edman, Program Director, Southeast Asia
Civil Rights Defenders
 
David J. Kramer, President
Freedom 
House
 
Mary Lawlor, Director
Front Line Defenders
 
Gerald Staberock, Secretary General
World Organization Against Torture (OMCT)
 
Yap Swee Seng, Executive Director
Asian Forum for Human Rights and Development (FORUM 
ASIA)
 
Simon Taylor, Founding Director
Global Witness
 
Arjan van der Waal, Program Director
Protection International
 
Gayathry Venkiteswaran, Executive Director
Southeast Asian Press Alliance (SEAPA)
 
CC:
Rajat Nag, Managing Director GeneralStephen P. Groff, Vice-President, Operations 2Kunio Senga, Director General, Southeast Asia 
DepartmentPutu Kamayana, Country Director, Cambodia Resident 
MissionChris Morris, Director, NGO and Civil Society 
Center 