Serbia :  Physical assault against 9 members of the Youth Initiative for Human Rights (YIHR)
January 27, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Serbia  / 2017 / JanuarySerbia : Physical assault against 9 members of the Youth Initiative for Human Rights (YIHR)URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY


 
SER 001 /
0117 / OBS 013
Physical assault
Serbia
January 27, 2017
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a partnership of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and
FIDH, requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Serbia.
Description of the situation:
The Observatory has
been informed by reliable sources about a physical assault perpetrated against
nine members of the Youth Initiative for Human Rights (YIHR)[1], while they were staging a protest at a public meeting organised by
Serbia’s ruling party SNS (Serbian Progressive Party) in the premises of the
Municipality of Beška, northern province of Vojvodina. The nine YIHR
representatives were protesting against a speech which was being delivered by
Mr. Veselin Sljivancanin, convicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in 2007, and in appeal in 2009, for crimes of
torture committed during the Yugoslav wars[2]. 
According to the
information received, on January 17, 2017, several members of the YIHR were
physically attacked after displaying a banner which read “War criminals should
become silent so that the victims can speak out!”, thereby disrupting the
speech of Mr. Veselin Sljivancanin. Subsequently, several SNS supporters
attacked the human rights defenders and violently forced them out of the
premises, after tearing down their banner. Several activists were injured, two
of them severely, after being violently kicked. The aggressors also damaged one
of the vehicles belonging to YIHR members, while the latter were trying to
leave. The incident occurred right in front of the local police station.
Shortly after the
attack, the SNS party publicly defamed the non-violent protestors, by accusing
them of being “fascists” and “hooligans”.
The Observatory
strongly condemns the above-mentioned attack, and calls for a prompt,
effective, transparent and impartial investigation. The Observatory more
generally urges the Serbian authorities to guarantee the physical and
psychological integrity of YIHR members in all circumstances, taking into
account that this is not the first attack suffered by the latter (see
background information). 
Background Information:
Members of YIHR have
faced at least four instances of harassment in the last year and a half,
including three physical assaults and a case of judicial harassment.
In May 2015, YIHR
members suffered an attempted physical assault while collecting messages of
condolences in the streets of Belgrade, to commemorate the 20th anniversary of
the killing of 71 people by Bosnian Serb forces in Tuzla. Several members of
the far-right organisation “Serbian Action” tried to tear their condolence book
apart, and to attack the human rights defenders, but were eventually stopped by
the police.
In July 2015, the
leader of YIHR, Ms. Anita Mitic, was involved in the organisation of a
gathering to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide, which
was due to take place on July 10. The event was banned by the government, and
Ms. Mitic was among the approximately 200 persons who defied the ban and held
their candle-lit commemoration the evening before. Following this gathering,
Ms. Mitic was charged with a misdemeanour by the Interior Ministry, for breaking
Serbia’s public gatherings law by organising a public gathering without
previously notifying the authorities. The first hearing in her case took place
on February 3, 2016, and no further hearings have taken place since then. 
During the same
candle-lit commemoration, protesters were further aggressed by nationalistic
groups, who threw various objects at them and even used fire extinguishers to
extinguish the candles they had lightened.
Besides, on April 15,
2016, three women human rights defenders belonging to YIHR were physically
assaulted in Belgrade’s Youth Centre by members of the Democratic Party of
Serbia (DSS) after staging a protest against an event promoting a book which
denies war crimes.
Actions requested:
Please
write to the authorities of Serbia asking them to:
i
Order an immediate,
thorough, transparent investigation into the attack against the 9 human rights
defenders, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before an
independent tribunal, and apply them the sanctions provided by the law; 
ii.
Provide compensation and redress to the injured human rights defenders, and
take all necessary measures to provide guarantees of non-repetition;
iii.
Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of all members of YIHR, as well
as all human rights defenders in Serbia, and particularly those carrying out
activities related to crimes committed during the war;
iv. Comply with all the provisions of the United
Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders;
v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by Serbia.
Addresses:
·        
Mr. Aleksandar
Vucic, Prime Minister. E-mail: predsednikvlade@gov.rs
·        
Ms. Nela
Kuburovic, Minister of Justice. E-mail:  kontakt@mpravde.gov.rs
·        
Mr. Ivica Dacic,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs.
E-mail: mfa@mfa.rs
·        
Mr. Stefanovic
Nebojsa, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of the Interior. E-mail: info@mup.gov.rs
·        
Ms. Zagorka
Dolovac, Procureur General. E-mail:
kabinetrjt@rjt.gov.rs, biljana.spasic@rjt.gov.rs
·        
Mr. Vladislav
Mladenović, Ambassador to the UN and other international organisations in
Geneva. E-mail: serbian.mission@bluewin.ch
·        
Ms. Ana
Hrustanovic, Ambassador to the European Union in Brussels: mission.serbia.eu@mfa.rs
·        
Mr. Vuk Žugić,
Ambassador to the OSCE in Vienna. E-mail: mission.vienna@mfa.rs
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy
of Serbia in your respective country.
***

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme is to
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.



[1]               The Youth Initiative for Human
Rights (YIHR) is a regional network of non-governmental organizations with
programs implemented on the territories of Serbia, Kosovo, Croatia, Montenegro,
and Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Initiative was formed by young people from
these countries in order to enhance youth participation in the democratization
of the society and empowerment of the rule of law through the establishment of
new, progressive connections in the post-conflict region of former Yugoslavia.
The Initiative was formed in 2003, and more than 30 persons work on various
projects on a daily basis. The work of the organization also includes several
hundred activists.


[2]               On December 8, 2010, his
judgement was reviewed, and the sentence was reduced to 10 years’ imprisonment.
He benefitted from an early release on July 5, 2011. 