United Nations Human Rights Council 40th session (25 February – 22 March 2019) - Statement delivered by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
February 28, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / 2019 / FebruaryUnited Nations Human Rights Council 40th session (25 February – 22 March 2019) - Statement delivered by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)   
28 February 2019

United Nations Human Rights Council
40th session (25 February – 22 March 2019)
 
Item 3: Interactive Dialogue with the Special Rapporteur on torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and with the Special
Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights Defenders
 
Statement delivered by the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) 
 
Thank you,
Mr. President. 

OMCT would like to thank Mr. Melzer and Mr. Forst for their reports.  
 
We stand by Mr. Melzer’s view that corruption
is one of the root causes of torture in many countries. In prisons we visited
across the globe, including recently in the Philippines, Paraguay, Mexico
and Togo, corruption is widespread and is too often the only means for
detainees to buy a little dignity and protection from torture and
ill-treatment. In Bangladesh, individuals who refuse or cannot afford to
pay bribes to the police are systematically subjected to torture or
ill-treatment. 
 
We are alarmed by the lack of protection and safety of
those exposing corruption and impunity. In Guatemala, the ensuing
intimidation and reprisals against those who have cooperated with the CICIG in
emblematic cases of corruption, are particularly troubling and are endangering
decades of struggle for truth and justice. In the DRC, many HRDs are victims of
torture and ill-treatment for denouncing bribery in the mining sector involving
extractive companies. This is the case, for example, of Pascal Kabungulu who
was tortured and killed for exposing cases of corruption in South Kivu. Eleven
years later, his family has still not obtained justice. 
 
Mr. Melzer, could you give specific
examples of countries where you observed the patterns you described in your report?
How do you plan to follow up and to integrate this approach in your assessment
of prison conditions in the countries you visit? Could you confirm whether follow-up
visits, including to Turkey, have already been scheduled?
 
We echo Mr. Forst’s concerns over the violent
setback that women human rights defenders are facing worldwide. We are
particularly worried by the widespread arrests of female activists in Saudi
Arabia, where dozens of them remain unjustly detained. Mr. Forst,
what measures should UN member States take to guarantee that WHRDs are
protected and allowed to do their work free from fear, threats, harassment and
violence?
 
OMCT strongly supports the recommendations of your
mission report on Honduras where defending human rights remains
a high-risk activity due to the high level of violence and the constant
criminalisation of HRDs. In 2018, three years after the assassination of Bertha
Caceres, there were at least 1782 attacks against HRDs including 9
assassinations, 43 cases of torture/ill-treatment and 131 cases of
criminalisation. 
 
We are particularly concerned about the scale of
attacks against environmental rights defenders in the country as well as in Myanmar,
Brazil, Cambodia, Cameroon, Colombia, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Mexico,
Peru, the Philippines, Russia, and Thailand. We
therefore call on member and observer States of the Council to work
towards the adoption of a strong resolution on environmental rights defenders,
which would inter alia highlight the need for their protection from
harassment and attacks and urge States to hold those responsible to
account. 