Congo, Democratic Republic:  DRCongo: arbitrary arrest and incommunicado detention of Mr. Edouard Kayimbo Sasula
June 10, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Congo, Democratic Republic / 2002 / JuneCongo, Democratic Republic: DRCongo: arbitrary arrest and incommunicado detention of Mr. Edouard Kayimbo SasulaDemocratic Republic of Congo: kidnappings  Case COD 200400  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Democratic Republic of Congo.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source of a number of kidnappings by the RCD.   According to the information received, since 12th April 2000, the RCD has begun an operation of kidnapping of civilians under the pretext that they have links with the MAI-MAI.  It is reported that on 12th April 2000, Mr. Ntambala, responsible for the 'service production Sante Animale du Centre de Developpement Integre' was kidnapped on Avenue Industrile by men in civilian clothing.  They are allegedly currently held in the '6e Brigade Militaire du RCD'.    Further information indicates that during the night of 13th April 2000, Mr. Byamungu Lufungulo, 55 years old, President of SODIPHAR was kidnapped from his home.  He is reportedly currently being held in the jail of the 'Agence National de Renseignement' where he is allegedly being subjected to torture.  In another incident, at 22:00 on Monday 17th April, Mr. Kaguta Mizumbi, 56 years old, Mr. Mutama and a girl, Kabesha (under 20 years of age), were kidnapped from their homes and are currently being held at the 6e Brigade Militaire du RCD.  Also, according to the information received, in Kalonge/Kalehe, Mrs. Venant Ntumwa and two other women were kidnapped on Sunday 16th April by the INTERHAMWE to an unknown destination.  Action requested  Please write to the responsible persons for the RCD urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned persons and order their immediate release; ii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these events, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  Me Joseph Mudumbi, Chef du Département de l'Administration du territoire du R.C.D. Goma - République Démocratique du Congo, N  télécopie : 00 871 761 850 629 ou  632.  Me Jean-Marie Emungu Ehumba, Chef du Département de la Justice, Réformes institutionnelles et Droits humains du R.C.D. Goma - République Démocratique du Congo N  télécopie : Idem.  Please also notify :  The President Laurent-Désiré Kabila. Présidence de la République, Kinshasa-Ngaliema, République Démocratique du Congo. Fax (+ 243) 880 02 120   Mr Mwenze Kongolo, Minister of  Justice, Ministère de la Justice, BP 3137, Kinshasa Gombé, République Démocratique du Congo.   Mr Gaetan Kakudji, Minister of the Intérieur, Ministère de l'Intérieur, Hôtel du Conseil exécutif, Kinshasa - Gombé, République Démocratique du Congo.  Geneva, April 20, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 