Azerbaijan:  Azerbaijan : wave of attacks against several human rights defenders
April 30, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2003 / AprilAzerbaijan: Azerbaijan : wave of attacks against several human rights defendersURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY  AZE 001/0403/OBS 021  Attacks / Threats / Harassment  Azerbaijan  30th April 2003    The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, an FIDH  and OMCT joint program, requests your urgent intervention in the  following situation in Azerbaijan  Brief description of the facts :   The Observatory has been informed by the Human Rights Centre of  Azerbaijan (HRCA) of a wave of attacks and acts of harassment against  several human rights defenders, in particular, M. Eldar Zeynalov, the  director of the HRCA, as well as members of his family, and Mrs.  Leyla Yunus, the director of the Institute for Peace and Democracy.  According to the information received, on 23rd April, a group of  about 30 to 50 people attacked the office of the HCRA with eggs and  chemicals. Protestors accused M. Zeynalov of treason and burned an  effigy of him. A member of the Organization for the Liberation of  Karabakh threatened to kill Eldar Zeynalov and to destroy the Human  Rights Centre in a suicide attack. When the police were called, one  of the policemen reportedly expressed his support for the violent  action.  This attack followed the accusations made on 22nd April, by members  of pro-governmental human rights organizations on the state-run  television station against M. Zeynalov and Mrs.Yunus, calling them  "enemies of the people". Eldar Zeynalov's whereabouts and home  telephone number were broadcast, and the audience was asked to take  action. The HRCA and the Institute for Peace and Democracy are part  of the Federation of Azerbaijani Human Rights Organizations and have  been documenting human rights violations in Azerbaijan. They have  been publicly criticized several times by pro-governmental  organizations.  On the day of the attack, M. Zeynalov had returned to Baku after  participating in a workshop on management skills of NGOS in the  region of Nagorno Karabakh with his wife Mrs Zalika Tahirova, who is  a coordinator for Amnesty International Group in Azerbaijan. These  attacks are allegedly part of campaign against M. Zeynalov aimed at  proving that he has an ethnic Armenian origin and therefore works  against the interest of Azerbaijan, in particular concerning the  disputed region of Nagorno Karabakh, self proclaimed State mainly  populated by Armenians. This continues to be a very sensitive issue,  in particular in the pre electoral context (elections are due to take  place in October). According to an Azeri television report on 24  April, the Ministry of Interior is considering criminal procedures  against Eldar Zeynalov on issues relating to his visit to Armenia.    On 25 April, the Human Rights Centre was again attacked, with  incumbent political party reportedly participating in the violence.  On the same day, a pro-government newspaper also condemned Eldar  Zeynalov, by writing that he was not of Azeri origin.  On several occasions, M. Zeynalov has asked for police protection.  After the second attack and in view of the lack of reaction on the  part of the authorities he decided to hire security guards. He had  already concluded an agreement with a firm for a month. In the  morning of the 29th April, the security guards were removed,  allegedly following pressure put by the Ministry of National  Security. M. Zeynalov is currently in Geneva to present a joint  alternative report on Azerbaijan to the Committee Against Torture  that has been prepared in collaboration with the World Organisation  Against Torture (OMCT) and the International League for Human Rights.  After his departure to Geneva, the attacks upon his offices stopped  but the phone calls at his offices and to his relatives has  continued. Relatives have been asked about the origins of the family,  asking for marriage certificates, etc, allegedly to find out whether  they have an Armenian origin. Other acts of administrative harassment  such as the revision of the documents for the offices premises that  are rented by the organization have started and it is feared that  administrative harassment will continue in order to put further  pressure on the organisation.  Furthermore, on 28 April, Eldar Zeynalov's sister in law, Zemfira  Yusif-Zade and father in law Isakh Tahirov (84 years old) were beaten  up by their neighbours, who demanded that they should leave the  country. The police were called but reportedly refused to protect  them.   On the same day, a group of 30 to 40 members of the ruling party of  Azerbaijan, went to the office of the Institute for Peace and  Democracy. They attacked the office and demanded that the director of  the institute, Leyla Yunus, should also leave the country. This  attack had previously been announced on TV. Despite the specific  request that had been made for the police to provide protection no  policemen were there and the attack occurred as had been announced.   The Observatory is very concerned for the physical and psychological  integrity of M. Zeynalov and the members of his family as well as Mrs  Leyla Yunus and other human rights defenders in Azerbaijan, and the  obstacles that hindering their legitimate work for the promotion and  protection of human rights. The Observatory is also concerned by  public statements that have been made by the authorities and by  private groups that are putting human rights defenders at risk, and  in that regard it recalls the duty of the State, in accordance with  the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the General  Assembly in 1998 "to take all necessary measures to ensure the  protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and  in association with others, against any violence, threats,  retaliation, de facto o de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or  any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate  exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration."  (article 12).   Action requested :  Please write to the Azeri authorities urging them to :   i.   Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of M. Zeynalov,  and members of his family as well as Mrs. Yunus and all human rights  defenders and ensure that they are able to pursue freely their human  rights activities;   ii.   Investigate the attacks, identify those responsible and bring  them to trial;  iii.   Conform with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights  Defenders adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in  particular its article 1 which provides that "every person has the  right, individually or collectively, to promote the protection and  fulfilment of human rights and fundamental liberties at the national  and international level. " and article 12 mentioned above;  iv.   Guarantee the effective respect of fundamental rights and  liberties in accordance with the provisions of the Universal  Declaration of Human Rights and the international and regional pacts  and covenants ratified by Azerbaijan.   Adresses :  H.E. Heydar Aliev, President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Office of  the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, 19 Istiqlaliyyat St.,  Baku 370066, Azerbaijan, Fax: +994 12 92 06 25, +994 12 92 28 68,  E-mail: office@apparat.gov.az, president@gov.az, root@lider.baku.az  Prosecutor's Office, 7 Nigar Rafibeyli St., Baku, Azerbaijan, Fax:  +994 12 92 06 82, +994 12 92 26 63  E-mail: prosec@azeri.com  Minister of Internal Affairs of the Azerbaijani Republic Lt.-Gen. Ramil Usubov Fax:    + 994 12 92 45 90  Geneva-Paris, 30th April 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken, quoting the reference  number given above.  The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the  protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete  support in their time of need.  The Observatory was the winner of the 1998 Human Rights Prize of the  French Republic.  To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: Tel and fax: FIDH : +33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11 / 43 55 18 80 Tel and fax  OMCT : (+ 41 22) 809 49 39 / 809 49 29 E-mail : observatoire@iprolink.ch 