Turkmenistan:  Open Letter: Civil Society request to vote against the CMI Offshore Project in Turkmenistan
January 23, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Urgent Interventions / Turkmenistan / 2017 / JanuaryTurkmenistan: Open Letter: Civil Society request to vote against the CMI Offshore Project in Turkmenistan
To: 
Board
of Directors 
European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
 20
January 2017 
 
Dear
Board of Directors: 
 
We are
writing to express our grave concerns about the CMI Offshore Project in
Turkmenistan, currently pending final review and awaiting a Board decision, and
urge the Board of Directors to vote against this project. We believe this
project is wrongly categorized as ‘B’ as it poses environmental threats to a
RAMSAR Protected Area; is inconsistent with the ‘calibrated approach’ of the
EBRD Country Strategy for Turkmenistan which excludes financing of the
hydrocarbons sector[1]; and
are concerned that the lender company does not have adequate social and
environmental policies to manage associated risks. 
 
Because
it is a transportation project, CMI Offshore is labeled as Category B, and thus
is not subject to the more thorough environmental assessment and monitoring
required for traditional oil and gas projects. Category B classification is an
incorrect assessment of the grave environmental risks potentially posed by
marine transportation of hydrocarbon resources. While the exact transportation
route is not specified in the PSD, it will undoubtedly affect the Hazar Nature
Reserve, an internationally protected Wetland of International Importance under
the RAMSAR Convention. The Hazar nature reserve provides habitat for 264
species of birds, including 55 nesting specie; 37 species of reptiles,
including two endangered species of snakes; and 47 species of mammals, 12 of
which are endangered. Transportation of hydrocarbons through this fragile
ecosystem does not only make CMI Offshore a very high-risk project, but also
contradicts the international protection designation of the Reserve. EBRD’s
Environmental and Social Policy paragraphs 8[2],
24 [3]
[4],
27[5],
call for a more in depth assessment of the associated risks, and classification
of CMI Offshore as ‘A’ due to significant environmental impacts to an
internationally protected area. We urge the EBRD to refrain from financing this
project due to the severe environmental impacts it poses to the unique and
internationally protected Hazar Nature Reserve. 
 
In
addition to its grave environmental risks, this project is not in line with the
EBRD Country Strategy for Turkmenistan, as well as EBRD’s Transportation
Strategy for the region. The Calibrated Strategic Approach, adopted first in
2010 and carried through into the current 2014 Country Strategy, connects
investments to political, economic and sector specific reforms. Unfortunately,
reform by the government of Turkmenistan has been largely absent and any
changes have been purely superficial, designed to appease international
institutions without providing any benefit to the citizens of the country.
Members of the political opposition inside the country have been pushed into
exile or imprisoned, with political prisoners often subject to torture[6]
and enforced disappearance. Freedom House continues to give Turkmenistan its lowest
rating for political rights, and the country scrapes the bottom of the
Reporters Without Borders Press Freedom Index. Widespread corruption is rampant
in almost every sector in the economy, including the natural resources sector.
Extractive industries in Turkmenistan are opaque and lack even the most
rudimentary public oversight and access to information. The government and
state-owned enterprises hold a monopoly on the sector and diversion of public
funds is extensive. Only 20% of the revenues from state-owned hydrocarbons end
up in state coffers with the rest remaining with the hydrocarbons agency ( GAN
Business Anti-Corruption Portal). The political and economic environments,
especially in the extractive industries sector, have not improved at all in
Turkmenistan. Some experts say the situation is getting worse. By investing in
CMI Offshore, a foreign company registered in Greece, EBRD is not contributing
to the development of the transportation sector in the country or benefitting
the Turkmen people in any way. In addition, transportation of hydrocarbons is
not included in EBRD’s Transportation Strategy, which focuses its approach on
efficiency, sustainability and low emissions models[7].

 
Even
though this is a transportation project, it enables the extractive industries
in Turkmenistan, and thus supports the corrupt, dictatorial regime that they
fuel. 
 
We urge
the EBRD Board of Directors to vote against CMI Offshore as it diverges from
the Calibrated Approach of the Turkmenistan Country Strategy and the
Transportation Strategy, and does not support Article 1 of the Agreement of the
Bank. 
 
We are
particularly worried that CMI Offshore does not appear to have a social and
environmental policy, especially when operating in the fragile ecology of the
Caspian Basin. As a multilateral institution positioned to promote the highest
standards of social and environmental accountability, EBRD must ensure that its
lenders have the necessary safeguards systems to implement their projects. As
you may remember, in 2011 EBRD financed a similar project in the Caspian, Circle
Maritime Invest, to transport oil from the Kashagan field in Kazakhstan. Agip
KCO, the contracting company for Circle Maritime Invest in this project, has
been responsible for the deaths of thousands of endangered Caspian seals, due
to neglect and mismanagement of environmental impacts of breaking sea ice.
Unfortunately, EBRD has absolved itself from the heavy environmental damage and
social impacts that the Kashagan project spread (Crude Accountability). The PSD
for that project stated. “The acquisition of three new tug boats is
associated with limited environmental and social impacts that can be readily
identified and mitigated. Therefore, the project is categorised as B.” Kashagan
is one of the greatest environmental, financial, and political extractive
industries disasters in the region, and certainly EBRD bears some
responsibility for this. We cannot let this tragedy happen again and request
that EBRD refrain from financing companies without sound social and
environmental policies and management systems. 
 
Identifying
a project as in the transportation sector, rather than in the hydrocarbon
sector, does not absolve the Bank from responsibility from the environmental
and political damage that may arise from the project. In fact, supporting this
project would enable corruption, and cause negative environmental and social
impacts, which arise from extractive industries in poor governance frameworks
like those in Turkmenistan. We therefore urge you, as stewards of public money
and high international standards, to vote against this project. 
 
Kind
regards, 
 
Signatories:

 
1.
Erida Skendaj, Albanian Helsinki Committee (Albania) 
2.
Valery Brinikh, All-Russian Society for Nature Conservation, Adygian branch
(Russian Federation) 
3.
Katie Morris, Article 19 (International) 
4.
Antanina Maslyka, Barys Zvozskau Belarusian Human Rights House (Belarus) Alexey
Zimenko, Biodiversity Conservation Center (Russian Federation) 
5.
Tolekan Ismoilova, Bir Duino (Kyrgyzstan) 
6. Petr
Hlobil for CEE Bankwatch Network (International) 
7.
Olexandra Matviichuk, Center for Civil Liberties (Ukraine) 
8. Yuri
Dzhibladze, Center for the Development of Democracy and Human Rights (Russia) 
9.
Galina Chernova, Сenter Globus (Kazakhstan) 
10.
Sonia Zilberman, Crude Accountability (US) 
11.
Vadim Ni, Ecoforum of Civil Society Organizations (Kazakhstan) 
12.
Muazama Burkhanova, Ecological Organization "Foundation to support civil
initiatives” (Tajikistan) 
13.Inga
Zarafyan, EcoLur NGO (Armenia) 
14.
Robert Kugonza, Friends with Environment in Development (Uganda) 
15.
Artur Sakunts, Helsinki Citizens' Assembly – Vanadzor (Armenia) 
16.
Avetik Ishkhanyan, Helsinki Committee of Armenia (Armenia) 
17.
Eldar Zeynalov, Human Rights Center of Azerbaijan (Azerbaijan) 
18.
Matthias Hui, humanrights.ch (International) 
19.
Jurate Guzeviciut, Human Rights Monitoring Institute (Lithuania) 
20.
Nafisa Mingazova, Hydrobiological Society of Russian Academy Science (Russian
Federation) 21. Tinatin Tsertsvadze, International Partnership for Human Rights
(International) 
22.
Svet Zabelin, International Social-Ecological Union (International) 
23.
Yevgeniy Zhovtis, Kazakhstan International Bureau on Human Rights and Rule of
Law (Kazakhstan) 
24.
Alban Muriqi, The Kosova Rehabilitation Center for Torture Victims (Kosovo) 
25.
Pepijn Gerrits, Netherlands Helsinki Committee (The Netherlands) 
26.
Ivar Dale, Norwegian Helsinki Committee (Norway) 
27.
Freddy KASONGO, The Observatoire d'Etudes et d'Appui à la Responsabilité
Sociale et Environnementale (OEARSE) (Democratic Republic of Congo) 
28.
Mirvari Gahramanli, Oil Workers' Rights Protection Organization Public Union
(Azerbaijan) 
29.
Sukhgerel Dugersuren, OT Watch (Mongolia) 
30.
Emma Hughes, Platform (UK) 
31.
Alex Postica, Promo LEX Moldova (Moldova) 
32.
Natalia Taubina, Public Verdict (Russian Federation) 
33.
Sukhgerel Dugersuren, Rivers without Boundaries Mongolia (Mongolia) 
34.
Askhat Kauymov, Russian Social Ecological Union (Russian Federation) 
35.
Alexandra Demelchuk, Ukrainian Helsinki Human Rights Union (Ukraine) 
36.
Regine Richter, Urgewald (Germany) 
37.
Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui, The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
(International) 
 



[1]           “The Bank will provide financing to
privately-owned companies outside the oil and gas sectors, focusing on food
processing and distribution, logistics, transport services, packaging,
furniture, and hospitality.” 


[2]           “The EBRD will not knowingly finance
projects that would contravene country obligations under relevant international
treaties and agreements, as identified during project appraisal.” EBRD
Environmental and Social Policy, pg 2.


[3]           “A project is categorised A when it
could result in potentially significant adverse future environmental and/or
social impacts which, at the time of categorisation, cannot readily be identified
or assessed, and which, therefore, require a formalised and participatory
environmental and social impact assessment process. A list of indicative
Category A projects is presented in Appendix 2 to this Policy.” EBRD
Environmental and Social Policy, pg 3.


[4]           “Projects which are planned to be
carried out or are likely to have a perceptible impact on sensitive locations
of international, national or regional importance, even if the project category
does not appear in this list. Such sensitive locations include, inter alia,
nature protected areas designated by national or international law, critical
habitat or other ecosystems which support priority biodiversity features, areas
of archaeological or cultural significance, and areas of importance for
Indigenous Peoples or other vulnerable groups." EBRD Environmental and
Social Policy, Annex A, pg 10.


[5]           “Initial Environmental and Social
Examinations (IESEs) will be carried out where insufficient information is
available at the time of categorisation to determine the appropriate category
and scope of appraisal.” EBRD Environmental and Social Policy, pg 4.


[6]           Committee against Torture, Concluding
Observations on Turkmenistan, available online: http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/Treaties/CAT/Shared%20Documents/TKM/INT_CAT_COC_TKM_25984_E.pdf



[7]           “The Bank’ s strategy will be to
support sustainable transport, which applies energy efficient technologies and
standards and encourages lower-emission modes to reduce energy consumption in
the sector “ http://www.ebrd.com/downloads/sector/transport/transport-strategy.pdf 