Guinea:  Violent repression against peaceful march
January 19, 2007
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Guinea / 2007 / JanuaryGuinea: Violent repression against peaceful marchGeneva, 19 January 2007. The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) strongly condemns the disproportionate and excessive use of force by security forces during a peaceful demonstration on 17 January 2007 in Conakry, which resulted in the death of at least three civilians, wounding of several demonstrators and detention, among others, of union leaders. The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned by reports from the International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture network, on the violent repression by security forces of a peaceful demonstration held on 17 January 2007 in Conakry in support of a general strike launched on 10 January 2007 by Guinea’s national trade unions to exert pressure on Guinean President Lansana Conte concerning several economic and social claims. Following unsuccessful attempts by Ms. Hadja Serah Rabiatou Diallo, Secretary General of the National Confederation of Guinean Workers (CNTG), and Mr. Ibrahima Fofana, Secretary General of the United Workers Union of Guinea (USTG), to discuss with President Conte reform proposals, a peaceful march was organised by CNTG and USTG, as well as the Guinea National Organisation of Free Trade Unions (ONSLG) and the Union of Guinea Workers (UDTG). However, the march was met with violent repression when security forces broke up the crowds with tear gas, rubber bullets and live ammunition. Several persons were reportedly detained. Both Ms. Hadja Serah Rabiatou Diallo and Mr. Ibrahima Fofana were briefly arrested by the police. Moreover, the building housing the trade unions was attacked by police firing rubber bullets and then ransacked. OMCT is deeply concerned by the violent repression on the peaceful demonstration and calls upon the Guinean authorities to put an immediate end to all forms of repression against those who exercise their freedom of expression and right to peaceful demonstration. Furthermore, OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of trade union leaders, in particular of Ms. Hadja Serah Rabiatou Diallo and Mr. Ibrahima Fofana, who were in the past subjected to threats for having called a strike. OMCT urges the Guinean authorities to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Hadja Serah Rabiatou Diallo and Mr. Ibrahima Fofana as well as of all demonstrators. OMCT also calls upon the Guinean authorities to order the immediate release of all persons arrested during the demonstration in the absence of valid legal charges, and if such charges exist, ensure that they are given a prompt and fair trial, in which their procedural rights are guaranteed at all times. The authorities should also launch a thorough and impartial investigation into these events, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law. Finally, OMCT urges the authorities to guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international humanitarian law and human rights standards. Geneva, 19 January 2007 Contact: Alexandra Kossin: 0041 22 809 49 39 