Bahrain:  ?Joint global civil society letter: Release Maryam Al-Khawaja and end clampdown on civil society in Bahrain
September 18, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2014 / SeptemberBahrain: ​Joint global civil society letter: Release Maryam Al-Khawaja and end clampdown on civil society in BahrainCSO Letter to King Hamad of Bahrain 18 9 20145 pages / 97 KB
18 September 2014 
HM Shaikh Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa
Office of His Majesty the King 
Rifa’a Palace, al-Manama, Bahrain
                            
Dear King Hamad, 
 
We, the undersigned 155 civil society organisations
based in over 60 countries write to you united in our condemnation of the politically
motivated arrest of human rights defender and co-director of the Gulf Centre
for Human Rights, Maryam Al-Khawaja at Manama airport on 30 August 2014. We
urge that Maryam is immediately and unconditionally released. 
 
We believe
that Maryam Al-Khawaja is being persecuted for exercising her legitimate rights to
freedom of expression and association in the defence of fundamental freedoms
including her co-operation with international
institutions and her important role in documenting human rights violations in
Bahrain. We stand in solidarity with Maryam and all other human
rights defenders wrongly imprisoned by your government for their work and
beliefs. 
 
We remind you that the harassment, intimidation or
stigmatization of a human rights defender, including arrest, detention, trial
or imprisonment for reasons of the opinions they may hold, constitute a serious
violation of Bahrain’s obligations under international law.  
 
We remain concerned that since the pro-democracy
protests intensified in February 2011 your government has deliberately
subverted democratic freedoms using a combination of legal and extra-legal
measures involving politically motivated prosecutions, brutal crackdowns on protests
and silencing expressions of dissent in the print and online media.  Many have raised the concern about the
arbitrary detention of hundreds of pro-democracy activists and their being
subjected to torture and ill-treatment in detention centres across Bahrain.
 
At the UN Human Rights Council, during Bahrain’s
Universal Periodic Review (UPR) in 2012 your government agreed to protect human
rights defenders and allow them to conduct their work without hindrance,
intimidation or harassment. On 5 September 2014, a group of United Nations independent
human rights experts also demanded Maryam Al-Khawaja’s release, and urged you
to follow through on your commitments made during the UPR to end the
persecution of all human rights defenders in Bahrain. We support Maryam’s
courage and strength for advocating for democratic change.  
 
We urge your government to recognise the legitimate
demands of the Bahraini people for their rights and end the cycle of protest
and repression.  We thus call upon you to
begin a process of democratic reform, healing and reconciliation in Bahrain.
Key steps towards achieving the above would be to release all detained human
rights defenders and prisoners of conscience and cease the oppression of human rights defenders, journalists and civil society
organizations.  
 
Sincerely,
 
1.     African
Life Center – USA
2.     African Women's Active Nonviolence Initiatives for Social Change (AWANICh) - Democratic
Republic of the Congo
3.     Aithria
Agro-Environmental Research and Action Team – Greece
4.     Ain
o Salish Kendra (ASK) - Bangladesh
5.     Aman
Network for Rehabilitation & Defending Human Rights – United Kingdom
6.     Americans
for Democracy & Human Rights in Bahrain (ADHRB) – USA
7.     Andalus
institute for tolerance & Anti-violence studies – Egypt
8.     Arab
Network for Democratic Elections – Lebanon 
9.     Arab
NGO Network for Development (ANND) – Lebanon
10.  Arabic
Network for Human Rights Information (ANHRI) – Egypt
11.  ARTICLE
19 – UK 
12.  Asian
Human Rights Commission – Hong Kong 
13.  Asian
Press Institute – Sri Lanka
14.  Association
Dea Dia from Serbia - Serbia
15.  Association
for Progressive Communications – South Africa 
16.  Association
for Women’s Rights in Development (AWID) -Canada
17.  Association
Transparence et Développement (ATED) – Mauritania 
18.  Avocats
Sans Frontières Network – France
19.  Bahrain
Centre for Human Rights (BCHR) – Bahrain 
20.  Bahrain
Human Rights Observatory (BHRO)  -
Bahrain 
21.  Bahrain
Institute for Rights and Democracy (BIRD) – United Kingdom 
22.  Bahrain
Rehabilitation & Anti Violence Organization (BRAVO) - Bahrain 
23.  Bahrain
Salam for Human Rights – United Kingdom
24.  Baidarie
Pakistan – Pakistan 
25.  Belgrade
Center for Human Rights  - Serbia
26.  Bishkek
Feminist Collective SQ –  Krygzistan
27.  Building More Future Opportunities and
Capacities (BMFOCA) – Nigeria 
28.  Burundi
Child Rights Coalition (BCRC)– Burundi
29.  Bytes
for All – Pakistan 
30.  Cairo
Institute for Human Rights Studies (CIHRS) - Egypt
31.  Campaign
Against Ignorance & Illiteracy (CAII) - Nigeria
32.  Cambodia
Center for Human Rights (CCHR) – Cambodia 
33.  Canadian
Journalists for Free Expression (CJFE) – Canada 
34.  Center for Peace Education - USA 
35.  Center
for National and International Studies (CNIS) – Azerbaijan 
36.  Center
International Training for Human Rights and Development – Democratic Republic
of the Congo 
37.  Center
of studies on Justice and Resolution of 1325 – Democratic Republic of  the Congo
38.  Charity
and Security Network - USA
39.  Citizens
for Democratic Rights in Eritrea – United Kingdom 
40.  Civic
Initiatives – Serbia
41.  CIVICUS:
World Alliance for Citizen Participation 
- South Africa
42.  Civil
Rights Defenders - Sweden
43.  Coalition
pour le Development et la Rehabiniltation Social (CODR UBUNTU) – Burundi 
44.  Community
Empowerment for Progress Organization (CEPO) – South Sudan
45.  Concertation
Nationale de la Société Civile du Togo (CNSC Togo) - Togo
46.  Corporación de
Investigación y Acción Social y Económica (CIASE) – Colombia 
47.  Counseling Center for Transgender People
Association – Turkey 
48.  Danish PEN – Denmark 
49.  Development Alternatives with Women for a
New Era (DAWN) – Philippines
50.  Democracy Monitor – Azerbaijan 
51.  Diverse Voices and Action for Equality -
Fiji
52.  East
and Horn of African Human Rights Defenders Project  - Uganda 
53.  Egyptian
Commission for Rights and Freedoms – Egypt
54.  Egyptian
Organization for Human Rights (EOHR) - Egypt
55.  Elma7rosa
Network for Advocacy Media& Arts - Egypt
56.  English
PEN – UK
57.  Ethiopian
Human Rights Project - Ethiopia
58.  European-Bahraini
Organisation for Human Rights (EBOHR) – Switzerland 
59.  European
Women’s Lobby – Belgium 
60.  European
Saudi Organizations for Human Rights - Germany
61.  Federation
of African Muslim Women in America  (FAMWA) – USA
62.  Families
of Desaparecidos for Justice - Philippines
63.  Foundation
of The Victims Of Abduction And Forced Disappearance (FVAFD) – Egypt 
64.  Fontaine-ISOKO
for Good Governance and Integrated Development- Burundi 
65.  Freedom
International – Ghana
66.  FIDH, within the framework of the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, France  
67.  Freedom House – USA
68.  Freddom Now - USA
69.  Frontline
Defenders – Ireland 
70.  Ghanaian
Centre of PEN International - Ghana
71.  Global
Network of Women Peacebuilders (GNWP) –USA 
72.  Groupe  des Experts Nationaux  - Madagascar 
73.  Gulf
Civil Society Association Forum - Kuwait
74.  Gulf
Centre for Human Rights (GCHR) -  Lebanon

75.  Helsinki
Citizen’s Assembly – Turkey
76.  Human
Rights Center "Viasna" – Belarus
77.  Human
Rights Concern Eritrea – United Kingdom  
78.  Humanist
Institute for Development Cooperation (HIVOS) – Netherlands 
79.  International
Campaign for Human Rights in Iran – USA 
80.  International
Centre for supporting Rights and Freedoms (ICSRF) - Egypt
81.  International
Commission of Jurists – Switzerland 
82.  International
Pen, San Miguel Chapter – Mexico 
83.  International
Service for Human Rights  - Switzerland 
84.  International
Solidarity Network Women Living Under Muslim Laws  - USA
85.  International Youth
Human Rights Movement – Russia
86.  Islamic
Human Rights Commission (IHRC) – UK
87.  Lualua
Centre for Human Rights(LCHR) - Lebanon
88.  Justice
for Iran (JFI) – United Kingdom 
89.  KAOS
GL – Turkey 
90.  Karapatan
Alliance - Philippines
91.  Khiam
Rehabilitation Center For Victims of Torture – Lebanon
92.  Kitgum
Women Peace Initiative (KIWEPI) - Uganda
93.  Lawyers
Committee for Human Rights (YUCOM) – Serbia
94.  Ligue
des Droits de la personne dans la région des Grands Lacs (LDGL) – Democratic
Republic of Congo
95.  Ligue
Algerienne Pour la Defense des Droits de l (LADDH) - Algeria
96.  Maharat
Foundation – Lebanon
97.  Martin
Ennals Foundation – Switzerland 
98.  MENA
Monitoring Group  - Tunisia 
99.  Middle
East Democracy (POMED) – USA
100.  Mpalabanda
- Associacao Civica de Cabinda - Angola

Properties Date: September 18, 2014Activity: Human Rights DefendersType: Urgent InterventionsCountry: BahrainSubjects: Arbitrary arrests and enforced disappearances, Human Rights Defenders, Threats, intimidation and harassmentShare thisTweetRelated articlesBahrain:  Ongoing judicial harassment against Ms. Zainab Al-Khawaja
Urgent Interventions / October 22, 2015Bahrain:  Provisional release pending trial of Ms. Maryam Al-Khawaja
Urgent Interventions / September 22, 2014Bahrain:  Continued arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Ms. Maryam Al-Khawaja
Urgent Interventions / September 10, 2014Bahrain:  Denial of entry into Bahrain and arbitrary detention of Ms. Maryam Al-Khawaja
Urgent Interventions / September  3, 2014LanguagesThis page is available in:EnglishYou can also translate it on the fly: 
  function googleTranslateElementInit() {
    new google.translate.TranslateElement({
      pageLanguage: "en",
      autoDisplay: false
    }, "google_translate_element");
  }
  Recently Viewed Articles 