China:  Death of Mr Goshul Lobsang following torture suffered in detention_OMCT calls for an immediate investigation
March 27, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / China / 2014 / MarchChina: Death of Mr Goshul Lobsang following torture suffered in detention_OMCT calls for an immediate investigation 
CHN 270314
Death caused by torture
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the People’s Republic of China. 
Brief description of the situation
TheInternational
Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by The Tibetan Centre for Human Rights
and Democracy (TCHRD), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the death of
Mr Goshul Lobsang, a 43-year-old
Tibetan political prisoner released on medical parole late 2013, following
torture suffered in detention.  
According to the information received, on 19 March
2014, Mr Goshul Lobsang died at his home at Bhelban Township in Machu County in
Kanlho Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture in China’s Gansu Province.
According to the same information received, Mr Goshul
Lobsang was repeatedly tortured by the Chinese police and the prison authorities
while in detention (see background
information). The torture allegedly included severe beating and repeated
piercing and penetration of tooth pick-like objects into the tops of his
fingernails and cuticles. Mr Goshul Lobsang never received appropriate medical
care during his detention. He was reportedly only given all kinds of
pain-relief injections that only worsened his condition. On 27 October 2013, he
was released on medical parole. It is believed that the authorities decided to
release him since they feared that he would die in custody. 
Upon release from prison, Mr Goshul Lobsang had
reportedly lost a lot of weight. He was unable to speak, walk, eat or drink. He
died less than five months after his release on medical parole. 
The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely
concerned about the death of Mr Goshul Lobsang caused by torture and other
ill-treatment suffered while in detention. OMCT urges the competent Chinese
authorities to carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial
investigation into the circumstances of the death of Mr Goshul Lobsang,
the result of which must be made public, in order to bring those responsible
before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil,
and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law.
OMCT recalls that the authorities have to fulfil their
obligations under international human rights law, notably the UN Convention
Against Torture, to protect the right to life and the right not be subjected to
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and to
bringing to justice those responsible for violating these rights. 
Background information 
Mr Goshul Lobsang was arrested on 16 May 2010 for allegedly
leading a protest in 2008 against the Chinese authorities at Bhelban Township,
in Machu County. In December 2010, the Gannan Intermediate People’s Court
sentenced him to 12 years in prison and he was imprisoned in Lanzhou, the
capital of Gansu Province. 
Actions Requested 
Please write to the
authorities in the People’s Republic of China urging them to:
i.              
Carry out a prompt, effective,
thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the death of Mr Goshul Lobsang in accordance with
international human rights standards, the result of which must be made public,in order to bring those responsible
before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil
and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;
ii.             
Ensure that adequate,
effective and prompt reparation, including adequate compensation, is granted to
the victim’s family;
iii.           
Guarantee
the
respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards; 
iv.           
Ensure that all persons deprived of
their liberty are treated with humanity and respect for the inherent dignity of
the human person as guaranteed by international human rights law; 
v.             
Ratify the Optional Protocol to the UN Convention
Against Torture. 
Addresses
·      
Mr. Li Keqiang Guojiazhongli, Prime Minister of the
People’s Republic of China, Guojia Zongli, The State Council General Office, 2
Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10
65961109 (c/o Ministry of Foreign Affairs) Email: notice@scio.gov.cn
·      
Minister of Justice of the People’s Republic of
China, Wu Aiying Buzhang Sifabu, 10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Chaoyangqu,
Beijingshi 100020, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6529 2345, Emails: minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cn
·      
Ambassador Wu Hailong, Permanent Mission of the
People’s Republic of China, Chemin de Surville 11, P.O. Box 85, 1213
Petit-Lancy 2, Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7937014, E-mail: chinamission_gva@mfa.gov.cn 
                                                                   
Please also write to the embassies of the People’s Republic of China in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 27 March 2014
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 