Libya:  30th session of the Human Rights Council (HRC30): Joint Statement: UPR Outcomes: Situation of Human Rights Defenders in Libya
September 25, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Libya / 2015 / SeptemberLibya: 30th session of the Human Rights Council (HRC30): Joint Statement: UPR Outcomes: Situation of Human Rights Defenders in LibyaLibya_2015.09.25_HRC30_Statement_UPR_English1 page / 752 KB​
HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL
30th session - September 25, 2015
Item 6: UPR Outcomes: Libya
 
 
Oral
statement delivered by the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), within the framework
of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, and the Cairo
Institute for Human Rights Studies (CIHRS).
 
Please check against delivery
 
 
 
Mr.
President,
 
 
OMCT, FIDH and
CIHRS welcome the report of the working group on the UPR on Libya.
 
In a recent report, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders has documented and denounced that human rights defenders have become
prime targets for many armed groups involved in the ongoing civil war in Libya.
Violence, harassment and intimidation are daily occurrences for these
defenders, in a climate of impunity resulting from the breakdown of the State.
In this context, the respect of human rights defenders as vital, non-partisan
voices should be a baseline consensus for any successful agreement between
parties to the conflict 
 
However, in
the current Libyan context, it is essential to go beyond their needs for
protection and to reclaim the essential role human rights defender should play
in the conflict-settlement and peace building process so that a State
respectful of basic human rights can be established. Defenders are the
keystones in the construction of a State that protects and empowers the
people. The situation they face is unbearable and puts at risk the entire
process of building a sustainable democracy in Libya. Therefore, we call on the
Libyan state to promote the participation of human rights defenders in the
implementation of the Political agreement recently concluded.
 
We therefore
welcome the seven recommendations made to Libya focusing on the need for
protection of human rights defenders and on the need for measures to foster
accountability for the perpetrators of assassinations, attacks, intimidation
and harassment against human rights defenders and call on the Libyan
authorities to implement these at the shortest delay. 
 
Finally, member
states of the Human Rights Council and OHCHR should take leadership in
examining the humanitarian situation of several Libyan human rights defenders
living in the diaspora for fear of reprisal; including looking at the
possibility of supporting and facilitating the granting, at the earliest
opportunity, of refugee status to Libyan human rights defenders who apply for
it.
 
We thank you
Mr. President. 