Side Event at HRC29: Attacks and Reprisals against Defenders: Enhancing Accountability for Violations
June 15, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Events / 2015 / JuneSide Event at HRC29: Attacks and Reprisals against Defenders: Enhancing Accountability for ViolationsFlyer Side Event Reprisals HRDs  - June 16, 20151 page / 335 KB
Organizer: OMCT-FIDH (within the framework of the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders) / OHCHR 
Co-sponsor: ISHR
 
Date
and time: Tuesday 16
June 2015, 16:00-17:30, room XXII, Palais des Nations
(Geneva) 
 
Chair/Moderation: 
·        
Mr. Antoine Madelin, Director of International Advocacy, FIDH
 
Panel
Speakers: 
·        
Mr. Michel Forst, UN Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
defenders
·        
Mrs. Reine Alapini Gansou, Special Rapporteur on Human Rights Defenders
of the African Commission on Human and People's Rights
·        
Mr. José de Jesus Orozco, Rapporteur on the Rights of Human
Rights Defenders at the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
 
With the
participation of :
 
·        
Ms. Katarzyna Jarosiewicz-Wargan, Head
of Human Rights Department, OSCE/ODIHR
·        
Ms. Christine Mardirossian, Office of
the Commissioner for Human Rights, CoE
·        
Mr. Michel Carrié, Salvatore Sagues,
Direction de la paix, de la démocratie et des DH, OIF
 
Concluding
remarks:
·  
 Mr. Gerald Staberock,
Secretary General, OMCT
 
Objectives: 
·        
Promote and reinforce international and regional mechanisms aimed at
protecting defenders
·        
Strengthen the cooperation between international and regional mechanisms
for the protection of human rights defenders to tackle impunity through
accountability, in order to ultimately mitigate the root-cause of reprisals
·        
Explore avenues for a
greater efficiency in the protection of human rights defenders
·        
Share good practices and
elaborate on the role of mandate-holders in the development of good practices to
systematically address impunity
 
 

Key
messages: 
 
Respect for the
activities of human rights defenders is essential to the overall enjoyment of
human rights. In many parts of the world however, defending human rights can be
a high-risk activity. In many countries, the violations faced by human rights
defenders remain largely unpunished. Some categories of defenders are
particularly at risk: the 2014 Annual Report of the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (FIDH-OMCT) showed that nearly 95% of
violations against land rights defenders remain unpunished throughout the
world.
 
How can
mechanisms react in a more systematic way to break the vicious circle of
impunity? Are coordinated / joint actions possible to tackle impunity, in order
to ultimately mitigate the root-cause of reprisals?
 
Attacks
The serious
nature of the risks human rights defenders face is of particular concern.
Attacks against them often take a variety of forms: killings, threats, smear
campaigns, arbitrary arrest and detention, judicial harassment,
intimidations... One of the major concerns in relation to violations against
defenders is the lack of accountability. In many countries, impunity for
attacks against human rights defenders persists, which has a negative impact on
their work and safety. The fight against impunity and access to justice for
violations against defenders are therefore essential conditions for ensuring a
safe and enabling environment for human rights defenders.
 
Reprisals
Human rights
defenders provide an invaluable source of information to international bodies
on emerging human rights problems, and collaboration between civil society and
the UN and regional human rights mechanisms is vital to their work. The UN, the
ACHPR and the IACHR all have normative agreements and rules of procedure
explicitly prohibiting acts of reprisals by States and non-State actors. Defenders
nevertheless continue to face great risks when trying to engage with the United Nations, its
mechanisms and representatives in the field of human rights, and/or the
regional human rights system. Reprisals or the threat of
reprisals can take very sophisticated forms and States are becoming
increasingly aware of the ability of reprisals to prevent human rights
defenders from speaking out. It is crucial that acts of reprisals are promptly investigated, perpetrators brought to
justice, and victims be provided an effective remedy. Such steps towards the
fight against impunity and towards full accountability for reprisals may
further constitute an important preventive measure and should be combined with
other measures facilitating civil society's safe and unimpeded access to the UN
and the regional human rights institutions.
 
In light of these concerns, this side-event seeks to explore avenues to strengthen the cooperation
between international and regional mechanisms for the protection of human
rights defenders, to ensure they respond to attacks and reprisals in a
systematic and coordinated manner, and to break the vicious circle of impunity
and enhance accountability for violations.
 

 
Participants: The side event is public and open
to all permanent missions of states members and observers to the Human Rights
Council, as well as to civil society 
 
 
 
Interpretation:
·                     
Fr → En
·                     
En → Fr
·                     
Fr → Es
·                     
Es → Fr
 
- Refreshments
will be served 