Malaysia:  Passage of peaceful assembly bill a major setback for civil liberties
December 21, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Malaysia / 2011 / DecemberMalaysia: Passage of peaceful assembly bill a major setback for civil liberties

PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY
 
MALAYSIA: Passage of 
peaceful assembly bill a major setback for civil 
liberties
 
Paris-Geneva-Bangkok, December 21, 2011. The passage of the highly 
restrictive Peaceful Assembly Bill by the Senate of the Malaysian Parliament on 
December 20, 2011 over the strong opposition of the Malaysian civil society and 
lawyers casts serious doubt over the Government’s sincerity of its announced 
intention to implement reforms to ensure greater enjoyment of civil liberties 
for Malaysians, said today the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights 
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights 
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture 
(OMCT).
 
Approved by the lower house on November 29, 2011, the Bill bans 
street protests, prohibits non-citizens and anyone under the age of 21 from 
organising or participating in an assembly, and puts significant power in the 
hands of district police chiefs to impose restrictions and conditions on an 
assembly. The only recourse to appeal any restrictions and conditions is with 
the Minister of Home Affairs, leaving no other adequate safeguards independent 
from the executive branch of the government. 
 
On December 7, 2011, four independent United Nations Special 
Procedures[1] have deemed the 
Bill a threat to the right to peaceful assembly and that many of its provisions 
represent “arbitrary and disproportional restrictions” that are “not justifiable 
under international law”. Malaysian civil society has long argued that this Bill 
is more restrictive than any existing laws regulating 
assemblies.
 
“Instead of increasing civil liberties as the Prime Minister has 
promised in his speech on Malaysia Day in September, the government, with the 
passage of this Bill, has demonstrated that its true intention seems to be the 
exact opposite”, said Debbie Stothard, Deputy Secretary-General of FIDH. 
“Human rights defenders will be especially affected by this Law since they 
are at the forefront of organising public events in support of social justice 
and human rights causes”, she added.
 
“This law is a real set-back for civil liberties in Malaysia. It falls 
short of minimum human rights standards on freedom of assembly and is clearly 
discriminatory”, said Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of OMCT. “What we need now is a real overhaul of the legislative framework to 
enable human rights defenders rather than enshrining arbitrariness into 
permanent legislation”, he concluded.
 
For more information please contact:
FIDH: Karine Appy, Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18OMCT: 
Delphine Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 39





[1] UN Special Rapporteurs on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly 
and of association; on human rights defenders; on the right to freedom of 
expression; and on the human rights of migrants. See OHCHR Press Release: http://bit.ly/uis4BX. 