Bahrain:  Continued arbitrary detention and judicial harassment faced by Nabeel Rajab
June 22, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2016 / JuneBahrain: Continued arbitrary detention and judicial harassment faced by Nabeel Rajab
New
information
BHR
001 / 0812 / OBS 048.20
Arbitrary detention / 
Critical health condition
Bahrain
June 22, 2016
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
Bahrain.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the continued arbitrary detention and judicial harassment faced by
Mr. Nabeel Rajab,
President of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR) and FIDH Deputy
Secretary General. 

 

According to the information received, on June 21,
2016, Mr. Nabeel Rajab appeared before the Public Prosecution, which remanded
him in custody for eight additional days, in spite of a request for immediate
release made by his legal counsel.
 
During yesterday's hearing, Mr. Rajab informed the
Public Prosecutor that he was suffering from severe pain due to chronic
illnesses such as gallstones and skin infections, and that his immunity was
deteriorating due to his current health status and bad detention conditions.
Mr. Rajab also highlighted that he had been examined by a doctor of the Bahrain
Defense Hospital earlier in the morning, who confirmed the need to remove his
gallstones, but that he was denied a copy of his medical report.
 
During the hearing, Mr. Rajab also reported that he
was held in solitary confinement in a dirty cell. He stated in particular that
cleaning products and items provided by his family were not allowed by the
guards and officers of the East Riffa Police Station, where he has been
detained since his arrest on June 13, 2016 (see background information). On
June 14, 2016, he had already appeared before the Public Prosecutor, who had
remanded him in custody for seven days, under accusations of “publishing and
broadcasting false news that undermine the prestige of the State”, reportedly
in relation to interviews he gave in early 2015 and 2016.
 
The Observatory denounces the continued arbitrary
detention of Mr. Nabeel Rajab, which seems to be yet another evidence of a
long-standing pattern of harassment against him in an attempt to sanction his
human rights activities (see background information).
 
The Observatory calls upon the Bahraini authorities to
immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Nabeel Rajab, and to put an end to
any act of harassment against him and in general against all human rights
defenders in Bahrain.
 
Background information:
 
In the morning of June 13, 2016, police forces reportedly led by the
Cybercrime Unit arrested Mr. Nabeel Rajab, after raiding his house and seizing
a number of electronic devices.
 
On June 13 in the afternoon, Mr. Rajab was able to
contact his wife by phone, and reported being detained at East Riffa Police
Station. On June 14, 2016, he was transferred to the Public Prosecution, which
remanded him in custody for seven days, on accusations of “publishing and
broadcasting false news that undermine the prestige of the State”.
 
Mr. Rajab's arrest took place on the first day of the
32nd session of the United Nations (UN) Human Rights Council (HRC)
in Geneva, in a context where five other human rights activists and relatives
of a victim[1] were stopped by Immigration, Passport, and Residency officials at the Bahrain International Airport on June 12, as they were about to
board their plane to Geneva, and were informed that they were banned from
travelling.
 
The Observatory recalls that Mr. Rajab has faced
continuous judicial harassment for his legitimate human rights work since his
first arrest in June 2012. On July 9, 2012, Mr. Rajab was sentenced to
three months' imprisonment for allegedly libelling the residents of Al Muharraq
via several tweets posted on his twitter account. On August 23, 2012, Mr. Rajab
was acquitted by the Higher Appeal Court.
 
On August 16, 2012, the Lower Criminal Court sentenced
Mr. Rajab to three years of imprisonment in relation to three cases
related to his participation in peaceful gatherings in favour of fundamental
freedoms and democracy. In December 2012, the Appeals Court reduced the
sentence to two years of imprisonment. Mr. Nabeel Rajab completed his
sentence and was released in May 2014.
 
On October 1, 2014, Mr. Nabeel Rajab was summoned
and remanded in detention by the General Directorate of Anti-Corruption and
Economic and Electronic Security of the Criminal Investigation Department (CID)
for “insulting a public institution” under Article 216 of the Bahraini Penal
Code. The case related to a tweet he published in September 2014, in which he criticised the military
institutions for generating extremist ideologies (the “terrorism tweet” case).
On November 2, 2014, the Third Lower Criminal Court ordered Mr. Rajab’s
release but barred him from leaving the country.
 
On January 20, 2015, the Third Lower Criminal Court
sentenced Mr. Nabeel Rajab to six months' imprisonment on the charges of
“insulting public institutions and the army”, pursuant to
Article 216 of the Bahraini Penal Code[2].

 
In 2015, two other sets of criminal charges were
brought against Mr. Rajab. On February 26, 2015, Mr. Rajab was summoned
for investigations for charges of “inciting hatred towards the regime” in
relation to a speech he made in February 2011 during a funeral (the “funeral
speech case”). To date, the police investigation is ongoing.
 
In addition, on April 2, 2015, over twenty police cars
surrounded Mr. Rajab’s house and policemen arrested him. Mr. Rajab
was then sent to the General Directorate of Anti-Corruption and Economic and
Electronic Security to be interrogated and placed in detention in solitary
confinement in Isa Town Police Station. On April 3, 2015, Mr. Rajab was
interrogated by the CID regarding two new charges brought against him under
criminal case No. 2015/38288. The first charge
was “insulting a statutory body” (Article 216 of the Penal Code) referring to
the Ministry of Interior in relation to tweets he posted denouncing the torture
of detainees at Jaw Prison (the “Jaw torture tweets” case). The second charge
was “disseminating false rumours in time of war” (Article 133 of the Penal Code)
in relation to tweets he published about the Saudi-Arabia led coalition air
strikes in Yemen (the “Yemen tweets” case). If sentenced on the second charge,
Mr. Rajab could be facing up to 10 years' imprisonment. Mr. Rajab
refused to sign the police minutes of the investigations. On April 4, 2015,
Mr. Rajab was brought before the Public Prosecution. The Prosecution
ordered seven days detention pending investigation. On April 5, 2015, security
police confiscated all electronics devices belonging to Mr. Rajab and members
of his family.
 
On April 11, 2015, the prosecution ordered an
additional fifteen days in detention for Mr. Rajab. On April 26, 2015, the
Public Prosecution officially charged Mr. Rajab under Articles 133 and
216. The Public Prosecution subsequently extended his detention for an
additional fifteen days. On May 11, the Bahraini High Court extended Mr.
Rajab´s preventive detention for 15 days.
 
On May 14, 2015, the Bahrain Criminal Court of Appeal
upheld the six-month prison sentence (the “terrorism tweet” case). 
 
On July 13, 2015, the King of Bahrain Hamad Ben Issa
Al-Khalifa ordered through Royal Pardon the release of Mr. Nabeel Rajab for
health reasons. Mr. Rajab had already served three of the six months jail
sentence. Moreover, on the same date, the Public Prosecution imposed a travel
ban against Mr. Rajab in relation to criminal case No. 2015/38288 related to
the Jaw torture and Yemen tweets cases.
 
Mr. Rajab’s lawyers subsequently filed appeals against
the travel ban with the investigating prosecutor on September 2, 2015, with the
Attorney General on September 16, and with the Office of the Public Prosecution
on October 1, 2015. They received no response to such petitions. On December 3,
2015, Mr. Rajab's lawyers submitted another petition to the Attorney General
requesting the lift of the travel ban imposed on Mr. Nabeel Rajab on July 13,
2015. In the written request filed to the Attorney General, Mr. Rajab's lawyers
raised the issue of urgency, as Mr. Rajab's wife health is continuously
deteriorating and needs treatment outside of Bahrain, accompanied by Mr. Rajab.
This request has been disregarded.
 
Actions requested:
 
The Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to:
 
i. Release Mr. Nabeel Rajab immediately and
unconditionally, as he is targeted solely for his human rights activities;
 
ii. Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity
of Mr. Nabeel Rajab and that of all human rights defenders in Bahrain;
 
iii. Put an end to any act of harassment, including at
the judicial level, against Mr. Nabeel Rajab and against all human rights
defenders in Bahrain;
 
iv. Conform in any circumstances with the provisions
of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by
the United Nations General Assembly, in particular:
- its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually
or in association with others, to promote the protection and realization of
human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”
;
- its Article 6 (c) which states that “everyone has the right,
individually and in association with others to study, discuss, form and hold
opinions on the observance, both in law and in practice, of all human rights
and fundamental freedoms and, through these and other appropriate means, to
draw public attention to those matters” ;
- and its Article 12.2 which states that “the State shall take all
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence,
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise
of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”.
 
v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by Bahrain.
 
Addresses:
 
• Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 587
• Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax : 00973
17 21 05 75; Email: ofd@mofa.gov.bh
• Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and Islamic Affairs,
Fax: +973 175 31 284
• Lt. Gen. Cheikh Rashed bin Abdulla AL KHALIFA, Minister of Interior, Email:
info@interior.gov.bh
• Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland.
Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch
• H.E. Ahmed Mohammed Yousif Aldoseri, Ambassador of the Kingdom of Bahrain to
the Kingdom of Belgium, Fax: 0032 (0) 26472274; E-mail:
Brussels.mission@mofa.gov.bh
 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of
Bahrain in your respective countries.




[1] Messrs. Hussain Radhi, member of BCHR,
Ebtisam Al-Saegh, and Ebrahim Al-Demistani and the parents of Mr.
Ali Mushaima, a victim of extrajudicial killing in 2011, who were planning to
attend the UN HRC 32 and to participate in a side event on the situation of
human rights in Bahrain.


[2] Article
216 of the Penal Code provides for a maximum sentence of three years'
imprisonment. However, during the October-19 hearing, the Prosecution made an
oral statement to ask the judge to consider Mr. Rajab as a “recidivist” in the
light of the repetition of the alleged “crime”, and that aggravated
circumstances should be retained, to double the maximum penalty applicable to
him, meaning six years. 