Sudan:  Joint Press Release: TRACKs-affiliated rights defenders sentenced, fined and finally released after ten months of arbitrary detention
March  8, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2017 / MarchSudan: Joint Press Release: TRACKs-affiliated rights defenders sentenced, fined and finally released after ten months of arbitrary detention Sudan_2017.03.08_Joint_PR2 pages / 210 KB​


THE OBSERVATORY – JOINT
PRESS RELEASE

 
Paris-Geneva-Kampala,
March 8, 2017 – After twenty-four court sessions, the Khartoum Central Criminal
Court sentenced human rights defenders Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar, Midhat
A. Hamdan and Mustafa Adam to one-year imprisonment and a fine. The three
men were released on time served after paying their fines. The court decision
exposes the shrinking space in which Sudanese civil society operates, the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (an FIDH-OMCT
partnership) and the African Centre for Justice and Peace Studies (ACJPS) said
today.
 
On
March 5, 2017, Judge Osama Ahmed Abdullah of the Khartoum Central Criminal
Court convicted TRACKs[1] Director Khalafalla
Al-Afif Mukhtar and TRACKs trainer Midhat A. Hamdan of dissemination of false information
(Article 66 of the Criminal Code) and
possession of immoral material (Article 14 of the Sudan Information Crimes Law
of 2007) and Director of Zarqa Organisation for Rural Development (ZORD) Mustafa Adam of espionage
(Article 53 of the Criminal Code). The three were sentenced to the same
punishment: one-year imprisonment and a fine of 50,000 SDG (approx. 7,376
Euros) each. Detained since May 2016, the three men were released the following
day from Al-Huda prison in Omdurman after their fines were fully paid.
 
“Although
we welcome the long-awaited release of Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar, Midhat A. Hamdan
and Mustafa Adam, we strongly condemn their conviction and the punitive
fines handed down and reiterate that they should never have been prosecuted in
the first place”, said Alice Mogwe, FIDH Secretary General.
“Furthermore, the court order to legally confiscate the equipment seized by the
National Intelligence and Security Services (NISS) during its raid of TRACKs’
premises because these allegedly constitute a danger to the State is very
worrisome”. 
 
The
three men originally faced charges together with seven other activists
affiliated with TRACKs in two overlapping criminal cases. The 2016 trial
targeted three other human rights defenders affiliated to TRACKs apart from Mr.
Mukhtar, Mr. Hamdan, and Mr. Adam. The three others were not detained throughout
the course of the trial, and the charges against them were eventually dropped
in January 2017. The trial proceedings
were marked by serious concerns not only regarding the baselessness of the
leveled charges, but also the non-compliance with international and
regional human rights standards on the right to a fair trial, including the
right to a public hearing. The defendants were not given a written list of the
charges they face, or copies of the evidence for the alleged crimes in order to
prepare a defence for court sessions. A number of civil society activists,
including journalists, were obstructed from attending the trial by court police
and subjected to harassment and intimidation, including having their photos
taken during court sessions. 
 
“We are deeply concerned that
the staff and affiliates of TRACKs were targeted for their peaceful engagement
in civil society efforts to promote human rights”, said Mossaad Mohamed Ali, Executive
Director of the African Centre for Justice and Peace Studies. “The presentation of evidence of
peaceful human activities in support of serious criminal charges highlights the
dire situation faced by Sudanese civil society and human rights defenders
today.”
 
On
August 25, 2016, the detention of Mr. Mukhtar, Mr. Hamdan, and Mr. Adam was
found to be arbitrary by the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD)[2],
due to the non-observance of international norms related to the right to a fair
trial.
 
“Defending human rights is not a crime. This trial was marred by
irregularities since the very beginning and this sentence exposes the failure
of Sudanese judicial authorities to effectively protect human rights standards
in the country. Moreover, the fact that the three were not released months ago,
in line with the UNWGAD opinion, tells a lot about the real aim of their
detention”, concluded Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General.
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this
programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human
Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
For more information,
please contact:
• FIDH: Audrey
Couprie: +33143552518 (Paris)
• OMCT: Chiara Cosentino: +41 22 809 49 39
(Geneva)
• ACJPS: Mossaad Mohamed
Ali/ Emily Cody: +256 779584542/ +256 788695068 (Kampala)
 



[1]                 TRACKs is a Sudanese NGO
providing training on various topics relating to human rights and information
technology. See The Observatory Urgent Appeal SDN 001 / 1016 / OBS 084.6, published on January 20, 2017.


[2]                 See Opinions adopted by
the UNWGAD at its 76th session, 22-26 August 2016 available at:
http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/Detention/Opinions/Session76/34-2016.pdf 