Uzbekistan:  United Nations body echoes the OMCT/RRG allegations of  widespread torture and ill-treatment in Uzbekistan.
November 28, 2007
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / Uzbekistan / 2007 / NovemberUzbekistan: United Nations body echoes the OMCT/RRG allegations of  widespread torture and ill-treatment in Uzbekistan. Geneva – Tashkent, November 28th, 2007 – The United Nations  Committee Against Torture made public its recommendations on the situation  in Uzbekistan, noting that it is particularly concerned at the “routine use of  torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in the  country”.  The United Nations Committee Against Torture, after examining the third  periodic report of Uzbekistan on the implementation of the Convention against  Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, adopted  a set of 20 important recommendations. The majority of these recommendations  echo the reports the RRG (Rapid Response Group) and OMCT (the World  Organization Against Torture) presented to the experts of the Committee[1]. These  reports documented several cases of torture and ill treatment that were fully taken  into account by the experts.  The Committee remains concerned at the “routine use of torture and other  cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in the country by law  enforcement and investigative personnel or with their instigation or consent”. It calls  on the Government to adopt “a zero tolerance approach to the continuing problem  of torture, and to the practice of impunity”. It also asks the authorities to ensure  prompt, full, impartial and effective investigations into all allegations, especially with  regards to the events of May 2005 at Andijon, and prosecutions of these cases.  The experts ask Uzbekistan to adopt in its legislation a definition of torture  consistent with article 1 of the Convention and to ensure that in practice information  obtained by torture is not invoked as evidence in any proceedings. They remind the  Government that “no exceptional circumstances, whatsoever, whether a state of  war or a threat of war, internal political instability or any other public emergency”  may justify the use of torture.  The Committee is also concerned at conditions of detention in Uzbekistan,  and especially at allegations of torture and ill treatment in custody. In that respect,  the use of internal regulations and procedures that are restricted to official use and not made public is denounced. The Committee has asked the authorities to provide  an update, within one year, of the measures taken to resolve this problem, and to  ensure fundamental guarantees to the detainees, such as the right to access a  lawyer, an independent doctor and family.  In addition, the Committee requests that independent experts and NGOs have  access to all places of detention. Within one year, the Government will also have to  transmit information about the monitoring of detention and other custodial facilities.  Violence against women, in places of detention or elsewhere, is another  subject of concern for the Committee. It pointed out the need for specific legislation  and other measures to address both domestic violence and trafficking in women for  purposes of sexual exploitation. It also calls for gender-specific training for law  enforcement officials.  Finally, the experts are deeply concerned at the intimidation, restrictions and  imprisonment of human rights defenders in the country and at the closure of human  rights organizations.  OMCT and RRG consider that these recommendations clearly show the  Convention against Torture is not fully implemented by Uzbekistan. The authorities  should now, urgently, take appropriate steps to ensure the Committee’s concerns  are taken into account.     [1] OMCT/RRG, Shadow report on the implementation of the UN Convention against Torture by  Uzbekistan, November 2007; OMCT, Uzbekistan: torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading  treatment, recommendations for dealing with their economic, social and cultural root causes,  November 2007.      Complementary Information:     The OMCT report on the implementation of the UN Convention against Torture by  Uzbekistan   The Committee against Torture   The Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment  or Punishment   Conclusions and Recommendations of the Committee against Torture      Press contact:  OMCT :    Patrick Mutzenberg – United Nations Treaty Bodies Programme   Mariana Duarte – Violence Against Women Programme  Cécile Trochu Grasso – Rights of the Child Programme     Rapid Response Group :  Sukhrobjon Ismoilov – PR Officer 