Mexico:  In response to Internal Security Law, international organizations form new coalition to draw global attention to rampant impunity in Mexico
December 19, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / Mexico / 2017 / DecemberMexico: In response to Internal Security Law, international organizations form new coalition to draw global attention to rampant impunity in Mexico

Washington, D.C. /New
York City/ Stuttgart/ Geneva, December 18, 2017 - The Mexican legislature’s approval last week of the
Internal Security Law marks a turning point for a country already reeling from
unprecedented levels of violence and widespread human rights violations. In response, a coalition of ten international organizations
committed to human rights and the rule of law are calling on President Enrique
Peña Nieto to veto the bill and announcing the formation of an International Observatory
on Mexico, whose mandate will be to observe and document the country’s
deteriorating human rights situation.
Far from addressing widespread impunity for crimes under
international law—including those committed by military personnel in the context of
Mexico’s long running “war on drugs”—the Internal Security Law would further enshrine the role of the
armed forces in the country’s law enforcement. This militarized strategy has terrorized Mexico’s
population for over a decade through well-documented cases of extrajudicial execution,
enforced disappearance, torture, including sexual violence, amongst other human
rights violations. These crimes have been perpetrated
with almost complete impunity as violence continues to grow; indeed, 2017 is on
track to be Mexico’s deadliest year yet. 
The
Internal Security Law provides legal cover for unfettered military action
against everyone in the country. It represents a dangerous escalation that
requires urgent action. The creation of the International Observatory—a permanent coalition of international
organizations from across Europe, the United States, and the Americas—will serve
to monitor the situation in Mexico, draw the attention of other nations to the human
rights regression underway there, and support national civil society colleagues
in the face of growing attacks against human rights defenders and journalists.
The Observatory will also continue to advocate with Mexican authorities to
remind them of their obligations under international law. 
Inaugural members of the Observatory on Mexico include Amnesty
International, the Center for Justice and International Law
(CEJIL), the Due Process of Law
Foundation (DPLF), the German Network for Human Rights in Mexico, Latin America Working Group (LAWG), the Open Society
Justice Initiative (OSJI), Peace Brigades International, Robert
F. Kennedy Human Rights, the Washington Office on Latin America (WOLA), and the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT); other international organizations
are expected to join in the future. As
Mexico moves further away from its democratic foundations, the world is
watching. 
Contact Persons
Erika Guevara Rosas,
Amnesty International: erika.guevara@amnesty.org
Marcia Aguiluz, CEJIL: maguiluz@cejil.org
Katya Salazar, DPLF: ksalazar@dplf.org
Carola
Hausotter, German Network for Human Rights in Mexico:
mexmrkoordination@gmx.de
Daniella Burgi-Palomino, LAWG:
dburgipalomino@lawg.org 
Ina Zoon, OSJI: ina.zoon@opensocietyfoundations.org 





Pat
Davis, Peace Brigades International: pbi89@gn.apc.org 
Angelita Baeyens, Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights: baeyens@rfkhumanrights.org 
Maureen
Meyer, WOLA: mmeyer@wola.org
Helena Solà Martín,
OMCT: hs@omct.org 