Philippines:  Arbitrary arrest, judicial harassment, and imminent deportation of Sister Patricia Fox
May  3, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2018 / MayPhilippines: Arbitrary arrest, judicial harassment, and imminent deportation of Sister Patricia Fox ​

















URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
PHL 003 / 0518 / OBS 056
Arbitrary arrest / Release / 
Obstacles to freedom of movement
Philippines
May 3, 2018
 
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent intervention in the following situation
in the Philippines.
 
Brief
description of the information:
 
The Observatory
has been informed by reliable sources about the arbitrary arrest, judicial
harassment, and imminent deportation of
Sister Patricia Fox,
an Australian nun who has lived in the Philippines for almost 30 years, and is
known as an advocate for agricultural workers, indigenous peoples, urban poor
and peasants’ rights[1].              
 
According
to the information received, on April 16, 2018, at around 2:30 pm, six
uniformed intelligence officers from the Bureau of Immigration visited Sister
Patricia’s missionary home in Project 3, Quezon
City, Metro Manila. The officers
then “invited” her to the Bureau of Immigration for a random check and
verification of her immigration papers and status. The officers showed Sister Patricia an order”
but did not provide her with a copy of the document.
 
After
arriving at the Bureau of Immigration office in Manila at around 4:00 pm, the
officers provided a Miranda warning to Sister Patricia and
told her she was under arrest for “illegal political activities”. They also
told her that she was an “undesirable alien”, and that she would be detained
overnight and deported the following day. No documents indicating the charges
were provided to her. She was released in the afternoon the following day and
given 10 days to respond with a counter-affidavit.
 
On
April 18, 2018, President Rodrigo Duterte announced that he had personally
ordered Sister Patricia be investigated for alleged “disorderly conduct”. It is
believed that Sister Patricia’s arrest was a result of her participation in recent rallies demanding the release of political prisoners and urging
Philippine authorities to respect human rights. On April 6-9,
2018, she also visited detained farmers in Tagum
City, Davao del Norte Province, and workers on strike as part of an
International Fact-Finding and Solidarity Mission (IFFSM) conducted by human
rights and farmers’ organizations in Mindanao. The purpose
of the IFFSM was to investigate human rights violations under Martial Law.
 
On
April 25, 2018, the Bureau of Immigration issued
an order based on Section 9 of the Philippine Immigration Act of 1940,
forfeiting Sister Patricia’s missionary visa and downgrading it to a temporary
visa, as a result of having “engaged in activities that are not allowed under
the terms and conditions of her visa”. The Bureau of Immigration also ordered
her to leave the country within 30 days.
 
The Observatory strongly
condemns the arbitrary arrest and deportation order against Sister Patricia,
which is an attempt by the Philippine Government to prevent her from continuing
her work as a human rights defender, and particularly aims at sanctioning her
defence of the rights of peasants, indigenous peoples, and the urban poor in
the country.
 
The Observatory urges the
Government of the Philippines to reconsider its decision and to allow Sister
Patricia to continue working to
support local communities in the country.
 
The Observatory further recalls
with grave concern the increasingly hostile environment and surge of attacks
against human rights defenders in the Philippines under President Duterte. 
 
Actions requested: 
 
Please write to
the authorities in the Philippines, urging them to:
 
i. Allow Sister Patricia Fox to stay in the Philippines and continue to
carry out her human rights activities;
 
ii. Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological
integrity of all human rights defenders in the Philippines;
 
iii. Put an end to all forms of harassment against Sister Patricia, as well as all human
rights defenders in the Philippines, and ensure in all circumstances that they
are able to carry out their legitimate activities without any hindrance and
fear of reprisals;
 
iv. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9,
1998, especially its Articles 1 and 12.2;
 
v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by the Philippines.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
H.E.
Rodrigo Duterte, President of the Republic of the Philippines, Fax: (+632)
742-1641 / 929-3968, E-mail: op@president.gov.ph or send message through
http://president.gov.ph/contact-us/
·    
Mr.
Alan Peter Cayetano, Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs of the
Philippines, Email: osec@dfa.gov.ph,
Twitter: @alanpcayetano
·    
Hon.
Menardo Guevarra, Secretary, Department of Justice of the Philippines, Fax:
(+632) 521-1614, Email: communications@doj.gov.ph
·    
Hon.
Jose Luis Martin Gascon, Chairperson, Commission on Human Rights of the
Philippines, Fax: (+632) 929 0102, Email: chairgascon.chr@gmail.com
·    
Mr. Jaime Morente, Commissioner,
Bureau of Immigration, Philippines, Fax: (+632) 309-7752,mail: binoc_immigration@hotmail.com, xinfo@immigration.gov.ph,
immigPH@gmail.com,
Twitter: @immigrationPH
·    
H.E.
Mr. Evan P. Garcia, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Philippines to the
United Nations Office in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 716 19 32 Email:
mission@genevapm.ph
·    
Embassy
of the Philippines in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: (+32) 02 345 64 25, E-mail: brusselspe@gmail.com
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the Philippines located in
your country.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, May 3, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The
objective of this programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression
against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the
European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international
civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the
emergency line:
• E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
• Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39
/ + 41 22 809 49 29
• Tel and fax FIDH: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25
18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80



[1]
Sister Patrica, 71, is an Australian citizen who has held a missionary visa for
the Philippines since the 1990s and has been conducting community service as
part of her missionary work in the country. An advocate of genuine agrarian
reform and human rights, Sr. Patricia has joined the activities of the Unyon ng
mga Manggagawa sa Agrikultura (UMA) and Pagkakaisa para sa Tunay na Repormang
Agraryo (PATRIA), including recent international fact-finding and solidarity
missions in Mindanao that probed the impact of the declaration of martial law
by the Duterte administration and its counterinsurgency programme, Oplan
Kapayapaan, on poor peasants on the island. Sisterr Patricia is also a staunch advocate
of the rights of agricultural workers, including the farmworkers in Hacienda
Luisita; the rights of indigenous peoples; and the rights of the urban poor. 