Viet Nam:  Human rights defender Cu Huy Ha Vu’s sentence upheld in appeal
August  3, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Viet Nam / 2011 / AugustViet Nam: Human rights defender Cu Huy Ha Vu’s sentence upheld in appeal

PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY
 
VIET NAM: Human rights defender Cu Huy Ha Vu’s sentence 
upheld in appeal
 
Geneva-Paris, August 3, 2011. The Observatory for the Protection 
of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against 
Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), 
expresses its deepest concern following yesterday’s decision of the 
Supreme People’s Court in Hanoi to uphold the seven-year jail term for Mr. Cu 
Huy Ha Vu.
 
On August 2, 2011, the Supreme People’s Court upheld the sentence 
against Mr. Cu Huy Ha Vu, a prominent human rights legal expert, to seven years of imprisonment and three years of house 
arrest for “propaganda against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam”, under 
Article 88 of Viet Nam’s Criminal Code, saying there was no basis for dismissing the case. The trial only 
lasted half a day. The proceedings were closed to foreign media and were held under 
tight security with uniformed and plainclothes security officers surrounding the 
court house.
 
Mr. Cu Huy Ha Vu was arrested on November 5, 2010 and sentenced in 
first hearing by Hanoi People’s Court on April 4, 2011, following a trial during which he was denied his 
right to a fair and public hearing by a competent, independent and impartial 
tribunal.
 
Mr. Ha Vu is a peaceful defender of cultural, environmental and civil 
and political rights and has consistently used the courts to seek justice for 
those whose rights have been violated by the Government and private actors. In 
July 2009, he initiated a lawsuit against Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung for 
signing Decision 167 in November 2007, which allowed controversial bauxite 
mining operations in Viet Nam’s Central Highlands. On October 21, 2010, Mr. Ha Vu filed a 
second lawsuit against the Prime Minister for signing Decree 136 in 2006, which 
prohibits class-action petitions.
 
The charges brought against Mr. Ha Vu are utterly politically motivated and are based on deeply flawed 
legislations that are routinely used to silence legitimate and peaceful critics. 
In particular, Article 88 has repeatedly been denounced by the United Nations 
Human Rights Committee as incompatible with international law and in violation 
of the rights to freedoms of opinion and expression and the right to participate 
in public affairs. 
 
“This case is sadly yet another example of the ongoing repression of 
fundamental rights in Viet Nam, and human rights defenders in particular have 
borne the brunt of such repression. Criminalising the peaceful expression of 
democratic ideals and legitimate actions to seek redress for rights violations 
makes a mockery of justice and the rule of law”, said today Eric Sottas, 
OMCT Secretary General.
 
“Although Viet Nam stated in its national report submitted in 
February 2009 to the UN Human Rights Council for the Universal Periodic Review 
process that “protecting and promoting human rights are always the Government’s 
consistent policy”, the conviction of Mr. Ha Vu clearly contradicts Viet Nam’s 
adherence to human rights”, added Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH President. 

 
Accordingly, the Observatory calls on the Vietnamese authorities 
to guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological 
integrity of Mr. Ha Vu, to immediately and unconditionally release him and overturn 
his conviction as it only aims at sanctioning his human rights 
activities, as well as, more generally, to put an end to all forms of harassment 
against human rights defenders in Viet Nam, in conformity with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human 
Rights Defenders and international human rights standards and international 
instruments ratified by Viet Nam. 
 
For more information please contact:
·  OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 39
·  FIDH: Karine Appy, Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18 