Bahrain:  Harassment of various human rights defenders, including excessive use of force, ill-treatment and torture in custody
June 13, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2017 / JuneBahrain: Harassment of various human rights defenders, including excessive use of force, ill-treatment and torture in custody





BHR
002 / 0617 / OBS 063
Judicial
harassment / Arbitrary detention
Ill-treatment / Torture / Intimidation / Killing 
Bahrain
June 13, 2017
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Bahrain.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about several acts of
harassment targeting various human rights defenders throughout May 2017,
including excessive use of force, ill-treatment and torture in custody and
other acts of intimidation by Bahraini security forces.
 
According
to the information received, on May 23, 2017, Mr. Mohammed Kadhem Mohsen,
Deputy President of a local chapter of the Environment Friends Society[1]
in the village of Duraz, died from injuries to his head caused by birdshot
during a police raid on the same day against a peaceful sit-in organised to
protest the harassment of religious leader Sheikh Issa Qassem[2].
During the raid, 286 persons were arrested and at least four other peaceful
protesters were killed, including Messrs. Mohammed
Ali Ibrahim Ahmed, Ahmad Jamil Ahmed
Mohammed Al-Asfour and Mohammed
Ahmed Hassan Mohammed Hamdan[3].
Throughout May 2017, peaceful protesters have been violently cracked down by
authorities in Duraz, which access is restricted to since this is the city
where Sheikh Issa Qassem resides.
 
Concurrently
to the repression of peaceful protesters, a number of human rights defenders,
journalists and online activists have been summoned for interrogation,
reportedly ill-treated, threatened and forced to publicly announce their resignation
from their human rights activities during interrogation by the Bahraini
National Security Agency (NSA).
 
On
May 23, 2017, Mr. Adel Al-Marzoog,
member of the Bahrain Human Rights Observatory of the Al-Wehdawi Society, a
political group, was summoned by the NSA in Muharraq and kept in custody until
the following day. Following his release on May 24, 2017, Mr. Al-Marzoog
announced his resignation and said that he will stop all his human rights
activities. It has been reported that he was ill-treated during his detention
and forced to remain standing for 18 hours.
 
On
May 24, 2017, the Third Grand Criminal Court reduced Dr. Taha Al-Derazi’s sentence from six to three months in detention
under charges of “illegal gathering”. Dr. Al-Derazi was immediately taken into
custody to begin serving his sentence. Charges against him stem from his arrest,
interrogation and subsequent release on August 14, 2016, after taking part in a
peaceful assembly on July 19, 2016 in the village of Duraz protesting the
arbitrary revocation of Sheik Issa Qassem’s citizenship.
 
On
May 25, 2017, the Second Lower Criminal Court handed down a 1,000 Bahraini
dinars (approx. 2,365 Euros) fine against journalist Ms. Nazeeha Saeed, France 24 and Radio Monte Carlo Doualiya’s
correspondent in Bahrain, for “working without a license”[4].
The Court of Appeals will review her case on July 18, 2017. Ms. Saeed, whose
application to renew her license has been rejected without any basis at the end
of March 2016, was summoned for interrogation and charged with “unlawfully
working for an international media” under Article 88 of Law 47/2002 on July 17,
2016.
 
Besides,
on May 27, 2017, Mrs. Ebtisam Al-Saegh,
Monitoring and Documentation Officer at the NGO Salam for Democracy and Human
Rights, was summoned by the NSA to Muharraq police station. She was released
seven hours later and was immediately taken to the hospital in a very
concerning psychological state, following a “severe nervous breakdown”. Upon
her release, Mrs. Al-Saegh reported having suffered acts of torture, including
severe beatings on the head, sexual abuse and was insulted threatened to be raped if she continued her human rights
work. NSA agents also threatened to target her family members. According
to reliable reports, she was also forced to repeat the royal anthem and beaten
and insulted when failed to do so properly. During her interrogation, she was
asked about the work of activists inside and outside Bahrain, including in
Geneva during sessions of the United Nations (UN) Human Rights Council (HRC).
 
Mrs.
Ebtisam Al-Saegh, who together with 22 other human rights defenders in April
2017 was subjected to a travel ban and falsely accused of participating in
“illegal gatherings” in the city of Duraz[5], is also
the target of a defamation campaign conducted by the pro-government newspaper Al-Ayam, which accused her of
fabricating reports on human rights violations in Bahrain. On May 15, 2017, Mrs.
Al-Saegh’s car was burnt.
 
Summoned
by the NSA in Muharraq on May 28, 2017, blogger Mr. Hassan Al-Sharqi, who had been tweeting about the Duraz protests,
the rights of peaceful assemblers and calling authorities to allow families of
killed protesters to see the bodies, declared on the same day that he would stop
tweeting. Reports confirmed that during his interrogation he was insulted,
beaten and ordered by a security officer to stop his online activities.
 
On
the same day, the head of the monitoring and documentation team at the Bahrain
Human Rights Society (BHRS), Mr. Abduljalil
Yousif, was summoned to the headquarters of NSA in Muharraq. He was
interrogated for four hours about his human rights activities with BHRS and
about his private life. Upon his release, he reported that he had been
subjected to insults and psychological torture and was threatened that if he
does not stop his human rights activities, he would be exposed and his family
will be targeted.
 
The
Observatory condemns the killing of Mr. Mohammed Kadhem and urges Bahraini
authorities to adopt effective measures to ensure the protection of human
rights defenders in the country. The Observatory also calls for an immediate,
thorough, impartial, and transparent investigation into Mr. Mohammed Kadhem’s
death and for those responsible to be held accountable.
 
The Observatory is appalled by the above-mentioned
reports of torture and ill-treatment and expresses its outmost concerns over
these new acts of harassment and intimidation against human rights defenders in
Bahrain, which only aim at sanctioning their legitimate human rights
activities, and urges authorities to fully investigate the allegations of
mistreatment by the authorities.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Bahrain, urging them to:
 
i.    Ensure the psychological and physical integrity of all human rights
defenders in Bahrain
and in particular of the aforementioned individuals;
 
ii.   Fully, promptly, impartially and transparently
investigate the killing of Mohammed Kadhem and other peaceful protesters as
well as the allegations of torture, ill-treatment, and physical and psychological
pressure of human rights defenders by security agents during interrogation and
in particular of the aforementioned individuals;
 
iii. Put an end to all forms of harassment, including at
the judicial level against all human rights defenders in Bahrain, and in
particular against the aforementioned individuals, so that they are able to
carry out their work without hindrance;
 
iv.  Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, in particular with its Articles 1, 5(b), and 12.2;
 
v.   Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Bahrain.

Addresses:
 
• Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA,
King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 587
• Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax : 00973
17 21 05 75; ofd@mofa.gov.bh
• Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA,
Minister of Justice and Islamic Affairs, Fax: +973 175 31 284
• Lt. Gen. Cheikh Rashed bin Abdulla
AL KHALIFA, Minister of Interior, Email: info@interior.gov.bh
• H.E. Mr. Yusuf Abdulkarim Bucheeri, Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the
United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50. Email:
info@bahrain-mission.ch
• H.E. Ahmed Mohammed Yousif Aldoseri, Embassy of the Kingdom of Bahrain to the
Kingdom of Belgium, Fax: 0032 (0) 26472274; E-mail:
Brussels.mission@mofa.gov.bh
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Bahrain in your respective
country.
 
***
Paris-Geneva,
June 13, 2017
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
FIDH and OMCT. The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or
remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT
are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights
Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·    
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·     Tel and fax
FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 ·    Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22
809 49 29



[1] The Environment Friends
Society is a non-governmental organization founded in 2000 to achieve the
national and global goal of protecting our environment, including through
participating in law-making processes.


[2] Religious leader Sheikh Issa Qassem is the most senior Shia cleric
in Bahrain. He was stripped of his citizenship in June 2016 and charged with
money laundering in July 2016. The charges relate solely to the Shia religious
practice of khums, an annual payment made by Shia Muslims to Shia
clerics for distribution to those in need. On May 21, 2017, a Bahraini court
ordered the seizure of Sheikh Isa Qasim's assets and properties and sentenced
him to one year in prison, suspended for three years. Since 2016, peaceful
protests regularly take place around his house to denounce the harassment faced
by Sheikh Issa Qassem.


[3] The identity of the fourth person has not been
disclosed to date. Amongst the 286 persons arrested, 197 were
transferred to Jau prison, without access to their lawyers, and 89 were
released.


[4] Ms. Nazeeha Saeed has been covering pro-democracy demonstrations in
Bahrain and denouncing rights violations committed by police forces during
these protests. As a result, she was previously held in custody in 2011 and tortured.


[5] See Observatory Urgent Appeal BHR 001 / 0417 / OBS 047, published on April 28, 2017. 