Nepal:  No proper investigation into allegations of torture of an 18-year-old student
August 16, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2012 / AugustNepal: No proper investigation into allegations of torture of an 18-year-old student
NPL 160812
Allegation of torture and ill-treatment/ No proper
investigation/ Risk of impunity
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in
the following situation in Nepal.
Brief description
of the situation
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by Advocacy Forum (AF), a
member organisation of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the alleged torture and
ill-treatment inflicted on Mr. Dipen
Limbu, an 18-year-old student and resident of Sanischare VDC-7, Naya
Buspark, Jhapa district, by the police. OMCT is concerned that, to date,
no proper investigation has been reportedly carried out into the aforementioned
allegations. 
According to the information
received, on 20 July 2012 at about 7 pm Mr. Dipen Limbu was playing games on
his mobile phone in front of the Angry Boy Hotel, nearby his home, when
Assistant Sub Inspector (ASI) Ram Kumar Sherpa from Temporary Police Station
Sanischare (identified by Mr. Limbu) arrived with other two unidentified
policemen in plain clothes and asked him why he was sitting in front of the
hotel. He was taken inside the hotel after he responded that he was waiting for
some friends. There, he was ordered to sit on his knees. The policemen then
reportedly punched him on his head with their fists and kicked him randomly
with their boots on his back. They continued to kick on his head and other
parts of his body when he fall on the floor. They also kicked him with sticks
accusing him of extorting money from businessmen. When Mr. Limbu reportedly
wanted to know more about the extortion allegations, the policemen continued
beating him. He was then forced to lie down on the floor on his stomach while
they continued beating him. 
According to the same information,
Mr. Dipen Limbu was then taken to Area Police Office (APO) Birtamod in a police
van. He was allegedly kicked during the transfer and, once at the APO, he was
slapped and beaten with a black plastic pipe and rubber belt turn by turn by
about four policemen for about five minutes while being forced to sit on his
knees. He was then taken to Kankai Hospital, Birtamod for a medical check-up. However,
according to Mr. Dipen Limbu, the doctor only asked him if he had comsumed
alcohol and did not ask him anything about the marks on his body. He was later brought
back to APO Birtamod where he was detained for two days without any charges. He
was released on 22 July 2012. 
According to AF lawyers who met Mr.
Dipen Limbu on 22 July 2012, they observed several wounds and marks on several
parts of his body. Mr. Limbu also complained of neck pain and headache due to
the kicking. On 24 July 2012, he went to Mechi Zonal Hospital for a medical
examination after a court order was issued. The medical report has not yet been
released. 
The International
Secretariat of OMCT expresses its deep concern about the safety and physical
and psychological integrity of Mr. Dipen Limbu. OMCT urges the competent authorities to carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the allegations of torture and
ill-treatment, in accordance with international human rights standards, the
result of which must be made public, in order to bring those responsible before
a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or
administrative sanctions as provided by law. 
OMCT recalls that the authorities have to fulfil their
obligations under international human rights law to protect the right not to be
subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment and to bringing to justice those responsible for violating this
right.
OMCT also recalls that victims
of torture and ill-treatment must be ensured the right to an effective remedy
for the human rights violations suffered as well as the right to full redress,
including compensation and rehabilitation.
Action requested
Please write to the authorities in Nepal
urging them to:
i.              
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Dipen Limbu, his
family and the lawyers working on the case; 
ii.             
Immediately put in place adequate protection measures for Mr.
Dipen Limbu pending investigation; 
iii.           
Carry out a prompt, effective,
thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the allegations of torture and ill-treatment,
in accordance with international human rights standards, the result of which must
be made public, in orderto bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial
tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by
law;
iv.           
Ensure that adequate, effective and prompt
reparation, including adequate compensation and rehabilitation, is granted to Mr. Dipen Limbu;
v.             
Ensure
the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards, in
particular ensure that all acts of torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment and punishment are clearly defined in law as offences in accordance
with the provisions set out in Articles 1, 4 and 16 of the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and that
they be made punishable with appropriate penalties which take into account the
grave nature of the crimes as required (which is not the case under the 1996
Torture Compensation Act).
Addresses
Ø Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Home
Affairs, Mr. Bijaya Kumar Gacchedar, Ministry of Home Affairs, Singha Darbar,
Kathmandu, Nepal. Tel: + 977-01-4211208 / + 977-01-4211214, Fax: +
977-1-4211257 / 4211286, Email: gunaso@moha.gov.np
Ø Inspector General of Police, Rabindra Pratap
Shah, Police Head Quarters, Naxal, Kathmandu, Nepal, PO. Box No.: 407, Fax: +
977 1 4 415 593, Email: info@nepalpolice.gov.np
Ø Attorney General, Mr. Mukti Nath Pradhan, Office
of Attorney General Ramshahpath, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: + 977 1 4262582, Email: attorney@mos.com.np,    info@attorneygeneral@gov.np , socialjus@gmail.com 
Ø DSP Bishwa Adhikari, Human Rights Cell, Nepal
Police, Kathmandu, Nepal PO. Box No.: 407, Fax: + 977 1 4415593 E- mail: hrcell@nepalpolice.gov.np
Ø Chairman of the National Human Rights Commission,
Mr. Kedar Nath Uppadhya, Pulchowck, Lalitpur, Nepal; Email: nhrc@nhrcnepal.org ; complaints@nhrcnepal.org  Fax: + 977 1
5547973
Ø Head of the Human Rights Unit, Office of the
Prime Minister and Council of Ministers, Singh Darbar, Kathmandu, Nepal. Tel: +
977-01-4211000, P. O. Box: 23312, Email: info@opmcm.gov.np 
Ø Permanent Mission of Nepal, 81 rue de la
Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland,
Fax: + 4122 7332722, E-mail: mission.nepal@bluewin.ch 
Please also write to the embassies of Nepal
in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 16 August 2012
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 