Thailand:  Press Release: Acquittal of two reporters a positive step for media freedom
September  1, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Thailand / 2015 / SeptemberThailand: Press Release: Acquittal of two reporters a positive step for media freedomThailand_2015.09.01_PR_English2 pages / 288 KBPRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

Paris-Geneva-Bangkok, September 1, 2015 - The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders urges Thailand to
repeal its criminal defamation laws following the acquittal of two reporters.
Today, the Phuket
Provincial Court acquitted Ms. Chutima “Oi” Sidasathian and Mr. Alan
Morison, two journalists with the Phuket Wan news website, on
computer crimes under Article 14(1) of the 2007 Computer Crimes Act and libel
under Articles 326 and 328 of the Thai Criminal Code.
“The acquittal of Chutima and Alan
is a positive step for media freedom and freedom of speech in Thailand.
Thailand must now abolish criminal defamation and make the Computer Crimes Act
compliant with the country’s international law obligations,” said FIDH President Karim Lahidji.
The criminal
proceedings against the Thai journalist and her Australian colleague stemmed
from a post on the Phuket Wan website on July 17, 2013, that quoted
parts of a special report published by the international news agency Reuters
on the same day. In its report, Reuters alleged that Thai naval forces
were involved in the trafficking of Rohingya boat people in Southern Thailand.
“We welcome the acquittal of Chutima and Alan. Nonetheless, their judicial harassment is a reminder of the ongoing
media repression in a country that not too long ago was considered a beacon of
media freedom in Southeast Asia. Thai authorities must immediately end all
forms of harassment of media workers and human rights defenders and guarantee
their right to freedom of expression,” said OMCT
Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
In recent years,
Thailand has witnessed several high-profile cases involving charges under its
criminal defamation laws and the Computer Crimes Act to silence media workers
and human rights defenders.
On 24 August 2015,
the Bangkok South Criminal Court indicted migrant and worker rights defender
Mr. Andy Hall under Article 14(1) of the Computer Crimes Act and Article
328 of the Thai Criminal Code (libel). Natural Fruit, a Thai pineapple
processing company, filed the case as a result of Hall’s research for a 2013
report published by the Finnish NGO Finnwatch. The report documented labour
rights abuses of migrant workers from Burma at the company’s factory in
Prachuap Khiri Khan Province. Hall faces a maximum penalty of seven years in
prison if convicted.
On 30 May 2012, the
Bangkok Criminal Court sentenced Ms. Chiranuch “Jiew” Premchaiporn, Executive
Director of the online news website Prachatai, to one year in prison and
a 30,000 baht (750 Euros) fine under Article 15 of the Computer Crimes Act. The
court reduced the sentence to an eight-month suspended jail term and a 20,000
baht fine. The charges were the result of Chiranuch’s failure to promptly
remove comments that had been posted on the Prachatai
web board between April and November 2008, which the court considered to have
offended the monarchy.
The Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in 1997 by FIDH and
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme
is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human
rights defenders.
For more information,
please contact:
• FIDH: Arthur Manet/Lucie Kroening: + 33143552518
• OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: +41228094924 