Emergency material support to human rights defenders at risk
October  1, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Links / 2015 / OctoberEmergency material support to human rights defenders at risk

OMCT,
including in the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders, provides material assistance and emergency support to human
rights defenders at risk working in the most difficult circumstances, in any
region of the world.
 
OMCT material assistance and emergency support aim at responding to
emergency requests for assistance submitted by human rights defenders and
organisations at risk. These can cover medical support (including psycho-social
support and rehabilitation); legal support; social assistance (including family
support); physical security; digital security; communications; capacity
building in security; secure transportation; support to temporary relocation
where necessary; etc.
 
Each request received is subjected to a preliminary inquiry, done in
collaboration with members of the OMCT SOS-Torture Network or other reliable
partners in the field. This inquiry is comprehensive and thorough as it allows
for the verification of information provided and needs expressed, as well as
for the eligibility of costs. It also permits an assessment of the type of
emergency intervention that is necessary.
 
1) Who can
apply?

Applications for material assistance and emergency support grants to human
rights defenders and organisations at risk are evaluated on a case-by-case
basis. 
 
Eligible
applicants for receiving financial support should meet the following 3 criteria
of identity, situation and needs:
 
1.    
The applicant is a human rights defender or organisation working in
defence of human rights in accordance with the United
Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders (human rights defenders,
regardless of their identity, origin or position, who are working to promote
and protect universally recognised human rights and freedoms of third parties -
acting individually or as part of a group - and using peaceful and non-violent
means in their work);
2.    
The applicant is facing risks because of his/her human rights work;
3.    
The applicant needs emergency support (lack of access to alternative
sources of support will be taken into account).
 
Defenders at
risk working in any region of the world are encouraged to apply, and in
particular:
·      
Human rights defenders working in the most difficult
countries and/or in remote locations;
·      
Human rights defenders who are particularly targeted
because of the issues they work on, including women human rights defenders,
defenders of LGBTI rights, land and environmental rights, activists fighting
against torture and ill-treatment, challenging violations of economic, social
and cultural rights, defending the rights of indigenous peoples, minorities,
people with disabilities, migrants and stateless persons, trade unionists
promoting labour rights, lawyers, journalists, bloggers and others promoting
fundamental freedoms, etc. 

2) For which type of support?
 
OMCT material assistance and emergency support is as concrete and personalised
as possible, with the aim of ensuring the security and protection of defenders
at risk, as well as of their family and work environment. 

Costs eligible for financial support or direct material support to human
rights defenders and organisations include the following: 
-  physical security; 
-  digital security; 
-  communications; 
-  medical support (including psycho-social support and
rehabilitation) to defenders who have suffered a medical condition as a result
of their peaceful human rights activities; 
-  legal support for human rights defenders judicially
harassed; 
-  humanitarian assistance (including family support); 
-  support to temporary relocation where necessary; 
-  capacity building in security; 
-  secure transportation; 
-  urgent monitoring, reporting and advocacy; 
-  etc.
 
3) How to
apply?

Applications for an emergency grant can be submitted by any human rights
defender or NGO who is facing risks because of their human rights work and in
need of urgent support. 

Please use the Application Form available in English,
French
or Spanish,
and send it by email or fax to:

OMCT International Secretariat
Human Rights Defenders Programme
Email:
grants[at]omct.org
Tel: +41 22 809 49 39
Fax: +41 22 809 49 29

To submit the application form by encrypted email, kindly contact OMCT
International Secretariat at the above-mentioned email address.
 
The amount of the grants allocated shall be generally
up to EUR 3,000, however every request will be assessed on a case by case
basis. 
 
A grant
agreement will be signed with human rights defenders receiving emergency
material support, specifying the purpose of the grant, the mutual obligations
and the reporting requirements.
 
All
applicants will receive a written response whether or not their application is
successful.

Human rights defenders or organisations receiving emergency support will be
required to provide a short narrative and financial report as well as original
receipts of related expenses six weeks after the grant is allocated.
This report will include information on what measures they have implemented and
what impact this has had on their capacity to manage their security as well as
whether there has been any change to the level of risk that they face. If a
report including all original receipts is not received on completion of the
grant the applicant will no longer be eligible for any further grants and will
be asked to return the funding. 
 
Download the
reporting form here


OMCT is a member
of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human
Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 OMCT wishes to thank the European
Union and the Republic and Canton of Geneva for their support. The content of
this page is the sole responsibility of OMCT and should in no way be
interpreted as reflecting the view(s) of the supporting institutions. 