Sport for Rights's Open Letters to the Presidents and Prime Ministers of 12 European countries
June  4, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Azerbaijan / 2015 / JuneSport for Rights's Open Letters to the Presidents and Prime Ministers of 12 European countriesOL Lithuania Pres.3 pages / 82 KBLetter from the Sport for Rights Campaign, which OMCT is a member of, to the Presidents and Prime Ministers of 12 European countries: Belgium, Bulgaria, Danmark, Estonia, France, Georgia, Germany, Lithuania, Ireland, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom. 'Sport for Rights' campaign, of which OMCT is member, has been established to raise the problem of political prisoners in the context of the forthcoming international sporting events to be hosted by Azerbaijan. 
Dear President XXX and Prime
Minister XXX,
As members of the Sport for Rights campaign, we are writing
regarding the inaugural European Games that will take place from 12-28 June in
Baku, Azerbaijan.
Although the Azerbaijani regime spends a great deal of time and
money to promote a positive image abroad, at home, it is engaged in a brutal
human rights crackdown. This crackdown has particularly intensified over the
past year, as the authorities have worked aggressively to silence all forms of
criticism and dissent. 
As a result, there are now dozens of
political prisoners in the country, including eight journalists and five human
rights defenders (listed in the appendix), jailed on spurious charges, with
some facing prison sentences of up to 12 years. Another human rights defender
is trapped in the Swiss embassy in Baku, facing arrest if he leaves. These individuals
have been targeted for their work defending the rights of others and telling
the truth about the situation in their country. 
In light of these serious problems, we are asking you to make your
participation in the opening ceremony of the Games contingent on the release of
the jailed journalists and human rights defenders in Azerbaijan. Similarly, we
ask that you do not send a high-level government delegation to the Games unless
these individuals are released. Further, we urge you to make an immediate
public statement condemning the ongoing human rights crackdown in the country
and calling for the release of the jailed journalists and human rights
defenders.
We want to be clear that we are not calling for a public boycott of
the Games. We are simply asking you to take this opportunity to impact positive,
democratic change, and to help our Azerbaijani colleagues, in the spirit of Lithuanian
values. 
Sincerely yours,
(for the signatory organisations, please see the pdf attached)

APPENDIX: LIST OF JAILED JOURNALISTS AND
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Jailed journalists:
1.     
Nijat
Aliyev – editor-in-chief of the website azadxeber.az,
serving a 10-year prison sentence on spurious charges of drug possession and
the illegal import and sale of religious literature.
2.     
Araz
Guliyev – editor of the website xeber44.com, serving an
eight-year prison sentence on spurious charges of illegal possession of
weapons, inciting hatred, and offensive action against the flag or emblem of
Azerbaijan.
3.     
Parviz
Hashimli – Bizim Yol
newspaper reporter and editor of the moderator.az website, serving an
eight-year prison sentence on spurious charges of organising the sale of
weapons from Iran.
4.     
Seymur
Hezi –Azadliq newspaper reporter
and presenter of the Azerbaijan Hour satellite television programme, serving a
five-year prison sentence on spurious hooliganism charges.
5.     
Khadija
Ismayilova – Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty journalist detained
on spurious charges of embezzlement, illegal entrepreneurship, tax evasion,
abuse of power, and inciting someone to attempt suicide.
6.     
Hilal
Mammadov – editor-in-chief of Tolishi Sedo newspaper, serving a five-year prison sentence on
spurious charges of drug possession, treason, and inciting hatred.
7.     
Rauf
Mirkadirov – Zerkalo
newspaper columnist, detained on spurious treason charges, awaiting trial.
8.     
Tofig
Yagublu – Yenu Musavat
newspaper columnist, serving a five-year prison sentence on spurious charges of
organising mass riots and using violence against police officers.
Jailed (and effectively jailed) human rights defenders:
1.     
Intigam Aliyev – human rights lawyer and Chairman
of the Legal Education Society, serving a 7.5-year prison sentence on spurious
charges of tax evasion, illegal entrepreneurship, and abuse of power.
2.     
Emin Huseynov – Director of the Institute for
Reporters’ Freedom and Safety, trapped at the Swiss Embassy in Baku, facing
arrest on spurious charges of tax evasion, illegal entrepreneurship, and abuse
of power.
3.     
Rasul Jafarov – Chairman of the Human Rights
Club, serving a 6.5-year prison sentence on spurious charges of tax evasion,
illegal entrepreneurship, and abuse of power.
4.     
Anar Mammadli – Chairman of the Election
Monitoring and Democracy Studies Centre, serving a 5.5-year prison sentence on
spurious charges of tax evasion, illegal entrepreneurship, and abuse of power.
5.     
Arif Yunus – historian and academic, detained
on spurious charges of treason and fraud, awaiting trial.
6.     
Leyla Yunus – Director of the Institute for
Peace and Democracy, detained on spurious charges of treason, fraud, forgery,
tax evasion, and illegal entrepreneurship, awaiting trial. 