CONCEPT NOTE - Thematic briefing: Protecting women from violence through the UN Convention Against Torture
December  5, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Statements / 2018 / DecemberCONCEPT NOTE - Thematic briefing: Protecting women from violence through the UN Convention Against Torture Download full article6 pages / 745 KBIntroduction
The UN Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment is the most comprehensive international
treaty dealing with torture and other ill-treatment. While the Convention speaks of right-holders
in terms of “he” and “his”, it provides for the prevention of and protection
from torture and other ill-treatment to men and women on an equal basis.
However, practice shows that an undifferentiated application of the provisions
in the Convention against Torture does not automatically translate into women
enjoying equal prevention, protection, access to effective remedy and
reparation including rehabilitation. This discrepancy is particularly evident
when it comes to violence against women and girls by non-state actors – in the
home, in the workplace, on the street.  
International human rights law has increasingly developed
to recognise the need for a gender perspective on torture and other
ill-treatment. Being the only legally-binding instrument at the international level
concerned exclusively with the eradication of torture or other ill-treatment, it
has been crucial that the Convention against Torture covers acts of violence
against women when it amounts to torture or other ill-treatment.Purpose
of the briefing
The purpose of the briefing is to inform a discussion
amongst members of the Committee against Torture (CAT) on the gender dimensions
of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and to
explore together how the CAT can provide an enhanced prevention and protection
framework for women and girls bearing in mind the particular risks of torture or
other ill-treatment that they face. Background
When women and girls are subjected to torture or other
ill-treatment, gender has a considerable impact on the form the torture and
other ill-treatment takes, the circumstances in which it occurs, the
consequences, and the availability of legal, medical and social remedies. The torture
of women and girls often assumes a sexual nature. Men and boys are also
subjected to sexual torture, but women and girls are disproportionately
targeted with rape, threats of rape and other forms of sexual violence. 
Women victims of torture are confronted with major
obstacles when they file a complaint or a reparation request. In societies where
maintaining the “honour” of a family and of society is seen as the
responsibility of its female members, the use of a form of sexual violence
against women and girls has an additional negative impact on their access to
justice and reparation, including rehabilitation. Women and girls may be
threatened with expulsion from their home or community, face severe stigma or
worse, may be at risk of further violence – including being killed. 
Many States do not secure
evidence in a gender-sensitive manner, and their laws and court rules are not
adapted to the special needs of victims of sexual violence. Consequently, women
and girls are frequently reluctant to report torture or other ill-treatment and
refrain from seeking justice. In this way, torture of women and girls often goes
unnoticed and perpetrators escape punishment. 
The crucial cause of the difference in the way in
which men and women have traditionally been protected under the Convention
against Torture is that historically, the common understanding of torture was
that it refers to violence and humiliation directly at the hands of state
actors whereas violence against women and girls often occurs at the hands of
non-state actors.
Developments in the movement to end violence against
women have broadened the accentuation of human rights law to issues of concern
to women and girls including rape and other forms of sexual abuse, trafficking
and domestic violence which resulted in a deconstruction of the public and
private divide. The adoption of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women (“the CEDAW Convention”) in 1979, and the
issuing of General Recommendations No. 19 on Violence against Women in 1992 and
the 2017 General Recommendation No. 35 on gender-based violence against women,
updating General Recommendation No. 19 are decisive steps forward. 
On the converse, the creation of a ‘specialized
branch’ of, and on, women’s rights has meant, at least in part, a
marginalization and compartmentalization of women’s rights and of women’s
rights institutions, as well as an excuse to deny or impede their inclusion within
the mainstream human rights law framework and system. There remains a tendency that –very generally
speaking—human rights violations against men are dealt with by the UN “general”
treaty bodies while women’s human rights violations are dealt with by the UN
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (“the CEDAW
Committee). While the CEDAW Convention is a crucial instrument for ensuring
women’s human rights, it is equally important to draw on the strengths of the
other human rights treaties and treaty bodies and to rely on their ability to
address and redress violations of women’s specific rights (e.g. the right to be
free from torture, rights of persons with disabilities, etc). 
Furthermore, it is important to recognise that women
and girls often suffer different forms of human rights violations, since gender
often intersects with other identity characteristics. These intersecting
identities include age, ethnicity, national origin and religion inter alia, identities that also need to
be taken into account. For this reason, it is imperative that human rights bodies
in general use a gender and intersectional approach in developing
jurisprudence, an approach that allows a deeper understanding of the multiple
forms of discrimination that women and girls encounter, as well as the
complexities of their needs, experiences and realities.
While the CAT had earlier addressed violence against
women at the hands of state officials, it expressed
for the first time in 2001 concern about trafficking and domestic violence as reflected in its concluding
observations and recommendations to Georgia,  Greece (UN Doc A/56/44) and Zambia (UN Doc A/57/44). Since then, the CAT has increasingly
addressed violence against women at the hands of private actors within the
scope of its work. A major step forward came in January 2008, when the
CAT published General Comment No. 2 clarifying in paragraph 18 that
where State authorities fail to exercise due diligence to prevent, investigate,
prosecute and punish non-state actors, “its officials should be considered as
authors, complicit or otherwise responsible under the Convention for consenting
to or acquiescing in such impermissible acts.” In
the same paragraph, the Comment goes on by explaining that “the State’s
indifference or inaction provides a form of encouragement and/or de facto
permission” to non-State actors. Significantly, the CAT concludes the paragraph
by noting the applicability of this principle “to States parties’ failure to
prevent and protect victims from gender-based violence, such as rape, domestic
violence, female genital mutilation, and trafficking.”
Also in January 2008, the then Special Rapporteur on
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, Manfred
Nowak, issued an extensive report on torture through a gender perspective. The Rapporteur
focused in his report on three forms of gender-based violence in the private
sphere: domestic violence, female genital mutilation, and human trafficking
because, in his words: “stating that these forms of violence can amount to torture if States
fail to act with due diligence, illustrates the parallels between torture and
other forms of violence against women.” In 2016, then Special Rapporteur on torture Juan Méndez repeated in
his report dealing with gender perspectives on torture and other cruel, inhuman
and degrading treatment or punishment (UN Doc. A/HRC/31/57): “States are
responsible for the acts of private actors when States fail to exercise due
diligence to prevent, stop or sanction them, or to provide reparations to
victims.” 
Importantly, other international and regional bodies have been applying the due
diligence test, notably CEDAW, e.g in General Recommendation No. 19 (1992) on
violence against women, para. 9 and more extensively in General Recommendation No. 35 on gender-based
violence against women, updating General Recommendation No. 19, and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights in
e.g. Veláquez Rodríguez v. Honduras, (series C No. 4, 29 July 1988). Similarly,
the European Court of Human Rights has developed a body of jurisprudence in
relation to positive obligations to effectively prevent, investigate,
prosecute, punish and provide remedies for acts of violence perpetrated by
non-state actors, e.g. Opuz v.
Turkey, application no. 33401/02,
9 July 2009 (violation of article 3, both on its own as Turkey failed to
protect the applicant and in conjunction with article 14 ECHR). 
The cases above illustrate the synergies between the
international and regional human rights bodies which have developed a
significant jurisprudence which aims to eradicate torture or other forms of
ill-treatment. The Inter-American Court of Human Rights have decided a number
of cases on violence against women finding a number of states responsible for
violations of the prohibition of torture, including most recently in its ruling
on the case of Linda Loaiza López and
Others v. Venezuela. 
Methodology
Against this backdrop, Women’s Link Worldwide and the
OMCT are co-hosting a thematic briefing before the CAT on how it can provide an
effective and equal protection framework for women and girls. The briefing will
convene experts on international human rights law, women’s human rights and on torture
and provide a space to discuss with the members of the CAT the
gender-dimensions of torture and to highlight the parallels between violence
perpetrated by state actors and non-state actors and to explore concrete
proposals. 
Issues to
be addressed 
Part I:             Torture
of women under international law
Part II:            Trafficking
in women and girls
Part III:           Rape
and other forms of sexual violence as torture – Two country cases
Part IV:           Protection
of women from torture: comparative practice
Part V:            Access
to justice and reparation, including rehabilitation
Part VI:           Integration
of gender perspectives in the work of CAT & the way forward
Format
of the discussion
The briefing has been designed to offer valuable
information and knowledge about the issues at stake, combined with an engaging,
self-directed approach to acquiring new concepts by adopting a
panel-dialogue-style engagement. To this end, we propose five panels with each
two to four presenters followed by a discussion with the members of the CAT in
order to share experiences, challenges and consider suggestions. 
About
the Organisations 
Women’s Link Worldwide is an international human
rights organization that uses the power of the law to promote social change
that advances the human rights of women and girls, especially those facing
multiple inequalities. We work to uphold women’s and girls’ rights through the
recognition of women’s experiences of violence and injustice in and at the
international and regional human rights systems, as well as national courts,
through litigation, third party interventions and participation in judicial dialogues
and capacity building strategies. 
The world Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) is the
main coalition of international non-governmental organisations (NGO) fighting
against torture, summary executions, enforced disappearances and all other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment and punishments. The strength of the OMCT
lies in its SOS-Torture Network composed of almost 300 NGOs around the world.
OMCT coordinates the NGO participation for the
Committee against Torture sessions. In 1996, OMCT launched a programme
to fight violence against women. 