Israel / Occupied Palestinian Territory: Press Release: Escalation of the campaign of attacks against prominent Palestinian human rights organisations
August 22, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2016 / AugustIsrael / Occupied Palestinian Territory: Press Release: Escalation of the campaign of attacks against prominent Palestinian human rights organisationsIsrael-OPT_2016.08.22_PR2 pages / 141 KB​ 














Geneva-Paris, August 22, 2016 – The credible death threats
against a member of the Al Mezan Centre for Human Rights evidence a serious
escalation in the ongoing smearing, intimidation, and threats campaign against
several prominent Palestinian human rights organisations. The Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders urges the international community to
ensure that a genuine investigation takes place.
 
On August 10, 2016, an Al Mezan[1]’s
staff member received an email sent both to his personal and work email
addresses, with the following death threat: “you deserve to see your loved ones
suffer and die. but maybe you would be hurt before them…”. Six photos of the
house where he resides were attached to this e-mail that follows two other
threatening messages addressed to him on August 2 and 6.                   Following the escalation in the level of the attacks
against Al Mezan, the Observatory has been informed about numerous incidents
that have taken place in recent months and that illustrate the scale of the
ongoing campaign of threats and attacks against Al Mezan and its staff members.
These attacks have included threats to Al Mezan staff members both directly and
through friends and donors, baseless accusations of affiliation with political
and terrorist groups or groundless claims of mismanagement of their funds and
of involvement in 'sexual crimes', just to mention some of the most worrying incidents.
The smear campaign seems to attempt to discredit the organisation in the eyes
of its donors and its international partners.           
 
The nature and the content of the attacks seem to
indicate the existence of close surveillance using advanced technologies to
track phone numbers, email addresses, and to get the content of the
communications of Al Mezan’s staff members, not only in Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territory (OPT) but also
in Europe.
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the coordinated
attacks against Al Mezan and recalls that similar attacks have recently taken
place against Al-Haq[2]. These attacks aim at
intimidating the organisations that pressured the Palestinian Authority (PA) to
join the ICC and that submitted together with Al Dameer and the Palestinian
Center for Human Rights (PCHR) communications to the International Criminal
Court (ICC) Prosecutor’s Office urging it to open an investigation.
 
In light of the continued attacks endured by prominent
Palestinian human rights organisations, the Observatory urges all relevant
stakeholders, including the United Nations (UN) and the European Union, to take
action to ensure that an immediate, exhaustive and independent investigation into
the situation is carried out. Moreover, they must contribute to create an
environment where human rights defenders, including those critical of the relevant
duty-bearers' human rights record, can operate freely, in compliance with the
relevant international norms and standards, including the UN Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme
is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders
Mechanism implemented by international civil society.  
 

For more information, please
contact:
OMCT: Miguel
Martín / Delphine Reculeau:
+41 22 809 49 39
FIDH: Arthur
Manet / Audrey Couprie: + 33 143 55 25 18
 
 



[1]    Al Mezan, a human rights organisation based
in Gaza and member of OMCT’s SOS-Torture Network, has declared its mission to
be 'to promote respect and protection for all
human rights; particularly economic, social and cultural rights, in the Gaza
Strip as part of the OPT throughout research, legal intervention, advocacy and
awareness with a sound combination of professionalism and community
participation'.


[2]    See Observatory’s Urgent Appeal ISR 001 / 0816 / OBS 071 issued on
August 11, 2016, and the Press Release of March 4, 2016, ”ISRAEL-PALESTINE:
Al-Haq human rights lawyer based in The Hague receives death threats, as
attacks against the organisation escalate” 