Sri Lanka:  Further acts of harassment against Mr. Ruki Fernando and Rev. Praveen Mahesan
March 24, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Sri Lanka / 2014 / MarchSri Lanka: Further acts of harassment against Mr. Ruki Fernando and Rev. Praveen Mahesan​













New Information
LKA 001 / 0314 / OBS 019.2
Judicial
harassment / 
Obstacles to freedom of expression
Sri Lanka
March
24, 2014
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Sri Lanka.
 
New information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about further acts of
harassment against Mr. Ruki Fernando, a human rights adviser to the
human rights organisation INFORM, based in Colombo, and Rev. Praveen
Mahesan, former
Director of the Centre for Peace and Reconciliation (CPR) based in Jaffna.
 
According to the information received, on
March 19, 2014, Magistrate No. 2 of Colombo issued, upon a request made by the Terrorist
Investigation Division (TID) of the Sri Lanka police, three separate orders against Mr.
Ruki
Fernando and Fr. Praveen Mahesan. The first ordered them to impound their
passport to travel outside the country and the second ordered all laptops and
I-Pads in their possession to be taken by the TID. The third order banned Mr.
Fernando and Fr. Praveen Mahesan to speak to anyone, locally or
internationally, including their relatives, about anything related to the
current investigation being conducted by the TID against them. This judicial order in fact
prevents them from speaking about not only their arrest but also almost all
human rights violations taking place in the North of Sri Lanka.
 
The Observatory recalls that Mr. Ruki
Fernando and Fr. Praveen Mahesan were arrested on March 16, 2014 at 10.30 pm as
they were carrying out a fact-finding mission in Darmapuram, Kilinochchi district, on the
arrest of Ms. Balendran Jeyakumari and her 13 year old daughter Vibushika
Balendran, in retaliation for campaigning against enforced
disappearances (See background information). They were subsequently subjected to
lengthy interrogations by the TID and released without any charges on March 18
at 1.30 am.
 
The above judicial orders were taken after
Mr. Ruki Fernando was interviewed by CNN and BBC[1]. In both interviews, Mr.
Fernando rejected the accusations levelled by authorities linking them to
revival of terrorism.
 
The
Observatory expresses its deepest concern about the judicial orders against Mr. Ruki Fernando and Rev. Praveen Mahesan, which
seem to aim at further harassing and silencing the two human rights defenders,
and recalls that freedom of expression is a fundamental right
recognised by the Constitution of Sri Lanka and enshrined in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. 
 
Background information:
 
On
March 16, 2014, at around 10.30 pm, Mr. Ruki Fernando and Rev. Praveen Mahesan were
arrested by a specially appointed unit of the TID as they were visiting the
heavily militarised area of Kilinochchi, North of Sri Lanka, in order to
investigate into the arrest on March 13, 2014 of human rights defender Ms.
Balendran Jeyakumari and her 13-year old daughter Vithuskaini, who have been
campaigning against enforced disappearances. They were also arrested and
interrogated by the TID. While Vithuskaini was subsequently placed under the
care of Probation and Child Care Service, Ms. Jeyakumari continues to be held
in Boosa detention centre under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA), under
which a person can be held without charge for up to 18 months.
 
Mr.
Ruki Fernando and Rev.
Praveen Mahesan were brought to the Kilinochchi police station, which initially
denied that the two defenders were detained there, before confirming the
arrest. The officer in charge of the Kilinochchi police, Mr. Kumara, in
particular confirmed the arrest and further stated that “Ruki Fernando and Rev.
Praveen behaved in a suspicious manner as they visited some families of those
who have lost their family members”. Mr. Ruki Fernando and Rev. Praveen
Mahesan were reportedly questioned separately for three hours by around 15 TID
officers at the Kilinochchi police station.
 
At around 1.30 am, Mr.
Ruki Fernando and Rev.
Praveen Mahesan left Kilinochchi police station handcuffed and blindfolded, accompanied with TID officers, before being questioned in Vavunia
police station until 7.00 am on March 17, 2014.
 
On March 17, 2014, at 11 am, TID officers
visited Mr. Ruki Fernando's parents to inform them about his arrest. Mr.
Fernando’s parents were issued with a Notice of Arrest stating that he was arrested by the TID on
alleged acts of terrorism on March 16, 2014, in Kilinochchi. At 1.30pm, TID
Director informed one of the lawyers that they were both brought to Colombo and
were being held at the TID headquarters.
 
Later in the day, police media spokesman SSP
Ajith Rohana announced that Mr. Ruki Fernando and Rev. Praveen were first detained
at the Kilinochchi police station under the PTA, before being transferred to
Vavuniya and then to Colombo for further questioning. They would reportedly be
charged with “attempting to create ethnic discord among communities and to
promote separatism”. 
 
On
March 19, 2014, at about 1.30 am, Mr. Ruki Fernando and Rev. Praveen Mahesan were released without being
charged after appearing in the Colombo Magistrate Court.
 
The Observatory is also
deeply concerned over
the statement made by the Representative of the Permanent Mission of
Sri Lanka to the United Nations in Geneva on March 18, 2014, which accused Mr. Ruki Fernando, Rev. Praveen Mahesan and Ms. Balendran Jeyakumari of
“terrorist connections” with the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE). The statement was made
in response to concerns raised by several NGOs against the detention of the
three defenders during the 25th session of the UN Human Rights
Council, which is currently taking place in Geneva, Switzerland.
 
On March 18, 2014, the Ministry of Defence
posted on its website a statement stating that Mr.
Ruki Fernando and Rev.
Praveen Mahesan had been taken into custody for questioning under the
Prevention of Terrorism Act because of their alleged connections with a
hard-core LTTE cadre. The statement was subsequently removed from the website.
 
Moreover, on March 19, 2014, the two
defenders were vilified in an editorial in the State-run newspaper Daily
News, in which they were accused of “defending the human rights of
terrorists” and of having established links with “a known terrorist who not only escaped from an IDP camp, but attacked
a law enforcement officer by discharging a firearm in broad daylight recently”.
The article further said: “what these NGO con-artistes want, it seems,
is on the one hand to exploit a normal law enforcement arrest for the purpose
of making a case against Sri Lanka at the UN HRC as a resolution on Sri Lanka
is currently being discussed at the 25th session of the UN Human
Rights Council, and on the other to make sure that nobody can be arrested for
terrorism related issues - thereby granting impunity for potential acts of
terrorist subversion”[2].
 
This
is not the first time that human rights defenders in Sri Lanka have been
falsely accused of treason and of having links with the LTTE. Such false
accusations have often been made following their participation to UN Human
Rights Council sessions and in response to resolutions on Sri Lanka adopted by
the Council[3].
Action requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Sri Lanka, urging them to:
 
i.       
Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Ruki Fernando, Rev. Praveen Mahesan and Ms. Balendran Jeyakumari as well as of all human rights defenders in Sri
Lanka;
 
ii.     
Release Ms.
Balendran Jeyakumari immediately
and unconditionally since her detention is arbitrary and only aims at
sanctioning her human rights activities;
 
iii.    
Repeal
the three above-mentioned judicial orders issued against Mr. Ruki
Fernando and Rev. Praveen Mahesan as well as the slandering statements
formulated by high Sri Lankan officials and publicly affirm the legitimacy of
the work of human rights defenders;
 
iv.    
Put
an end to any kind of harassment - including at the judicial level - against Mr. Ruki Fernando, Rev. Praveen Mahesan and Ms. Balendran Jeyakumari and more generally against all human rights
defenders in Sri Lanka and ensure that they are able to carry out their
peaceful and legitimate activities without any hindrance and fear of reprisals;
 
v.      
Conform
with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by
the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially
regarding the following Articles:
-       
Article
1: everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels; 
-       
Article
5 (a): For the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental
freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in association with others,
at the national and international levels (a) To meet or assemble peacefully;
-       
Article
12.2: the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by
the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with
others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of his or her rights [...]; 
 
vi.    
Ensure
in all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Sri Lanka.
 
Addresses:
 
·       President Mahinda
Rajapakse, Presidential Secretariat, C/ Office of the President, Temple Trees
150, Galle Road, Colombo 3, Sri Lanka, Fax: (+94) 11 472100 / (+94) 11 2446657
/ (+94) 11 243 0590, Email: lalith@icta.lk 
·       D.M. Jayaratne, Prime
Minister of Sri Lanka, No. 58, Sir Ernest De Silva Mawatha, Colombo 07,
Sri Lanka. Fax no: (+94) 112 575454. Email: slpm@pmoffice.gov.lk 
·      
Mr. Sarath Palitha Fernando, Attorney General,
Attorney General's Department. Colombo 12, Sri Lanka. Fax: (+94) 11 2 436421. 
·      
Justice Priyantha R.P. Perera, Chairman, Human
Rights Commission of Sri Lanka. No: 165 Kynsey Road, Borella, Colombo 8, Sri
Lanka. Fax: (+94) 11 2 694924. Email: sechrc@sltnet.lk
·       H.E. Mr. Ravinatha P. Aryasinha, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Sri Lanka to the United Nations in Geneva, 56 rue
de Moillebeau, 1211 Geneva 19. Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 73 49 084. E-mail: mission@lankamission.org
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Sri Lanka in your
respective country.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, March 24, 2014
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human
Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.

 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41
(0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1
43 55 18 80



[1] See http://groundviews.org/2014/03/22/video-of-ruki-fernandos-interview-with-the-bbc/



[2] http://www.dailynews.lk/editorial/defending-human-rights-terrorists



[3] See for instance Observatory
Urgent Appeal LKA 002 / 0312 / OBS 028, issued
on March 28, 2012. 