Turkey:  New blow to Rule of Law in Turkey: more than 50 Turkish lawyers arrested for denouncing the repression of protesters
June 12, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2013 / JuneTurkey: New blow to Rule of Law in Turkey: more than 50 Turkish lawyers arrested for denouncing the repression of protesters
Joint Press Release
 
New blow to Rule of Law in Turkey: more than 50
Turkish lawyers arrested for denouncing the repression of protesters

 
Paris-Geneva, June 12, 2013. The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), the Union Internationale des Avocats (UIA – International Association
of Lawyers), and the Conférence internationale des Barreaux (CIB – International
Bar associations Conference) express their deepest concern following the arrest
of more than 50 lawyers who were demonstrating inside a courthouse in Istanbul
to denounce the repression of the “Occupy Gezi” protesters and call upon the
authorities to guarantee the free exercise of the right to freedoms of peaceful
assembly and expression.
 
During the afternoon of June 11, 2013, more than 50
lawyers, who were protesting at Çağlayan Justice Palace (the main justice court
in Istanbul) to denounce the repression of the “Occupy Gezi” protestors, were
arrested by members of Turkey’s special forces. 
 
According to some reports, Vice Chief Public
Prosecutor Zekeriya Oz ordered their arrest. All those arrested were taken to a
hospital before being transferred to the Anti-Terror Branch of Istanbul Police
Headquarters. Around 100 lawyers gathered outside the police station demanding
that their colleagues be released.
 
Reportedly, many of the lawyers were beaten and kicked
on the ground by the police and their clothes were torn. To date, the legal
basis for their arrest remains unclear. All lawyers were released shortly after
their arrest.
 
As a similar peaceful protest should take place today
at noon before the Çağlayan Justice Palace, our organisations proclaim that “everyone
has the right, individually or in association with others, to promote the
protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the
national [...] level[s]”[1]
and that for that purpose the “the State shall take all necessary measures
to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone [...] against
any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination,
pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her
legitimate exercise of the rights [...]”[2].
 
Moreover, "lawyers,
like other citizens are entitled to freedom of expression, belief, association
and assembly. In particular, they shall have the right to take part in public
discussion of matters concerning the law, the administration of justice and the
promotion and protection of human rights (...)"[3]. 
 
Recalling the role of lawyers as agents in the
administration of justice, our organisations call upon the Turkish authorities
to: 
·       
guarantee the free exercise of the right to freedoms
of peaceful assembly and expression of lawyers; 
·       
carry out a thorough, impartial and transparent
investigation into the above mentioned use of force, bring any offender before
a competent and impartial tribunal and apply to them the sanctions provided by
the law;
·       
guarantee their safety and integrity in all
circumstances; and
·       
respect the rule of law.
 
Finally, we remind that 36 lawyer remain in detention
today for the legitimate exercise of their profession and call on the Turkish
authorities to put an end to all kinds of harassment against lawyers involved
in the defence of human rights. 
 
For further information,
please contact:
• FIDH: Audrey Couprie / Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18
• OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 39
• UIA: Marie-Pierre Lienard: + 33 1 44 88 55 66




[1] Article
1 of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on
December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly.


[2] Article 12 of the United Nations
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the
United Nations General Assembly.


[3] Article 24 of the UN Basic Principles on
the Role of Lawyers, adopted on December 18, 1990 by the United Nations General
Assembly 