Sudan:  Joint Statement: Urgent safety concern for student activists detained incommunicado after Khartoum University protests
May 17, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2016 / MaySudan: Joint Statement: Urgent safety concern for student activists detained incommunicado after Khartoum University protestsJoint Statement Sudan 170520163 pages / 459 KBParis-Geneva-Kampala,
May 17, 2016. Sudanese authorities should immediately release and guarantee
the safety of 12 student activists currently detained incommunicado and without
charges by Sudan’s National Intelligence and Security Services (NISS) in
connection with protests on the University of Khartoum campus, FIDH, the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the African Centre for Justice and
Peace Studies (ACJPS) said today. There are serious concerns for the safety of
the students who have been denied access to their families and lawyers.
Authorities have also refused access for lawyers to three other students who
are currently detained incommunicado in police custody, accused of attacking a
police officer during protests at the University of Khartoum.
On May 5, 2016, at around 2pm
local time, a group of plain-clothed NISS officers, armed with Kalashnikov
rifles and pistols, raided the offices of prominent human rights lawyer Mr. Nabil
Adib in Khartoum. At the time of the raid, Nabil Adib, Chairperson of the Sudanese Human Rights Monitor (SHRM), a
Khartoum-based human rights organisation, was holding a meeting at his legal
offices with a group of students who had recently been dismissed or suspended
from studies at the University of Khartoum following protests on the campus. 10
students, who were meeting with lawyers to discuss an administrative appeal to
the dismissals, were detained from the office together with two lawyers and two
female employees of the law firm.
During the armed raid, NISS
officers ransacked the law office and seized legal files and equipment,
including Nabil Adib's personal laptop, without providing a warrant and in
violation of the UN Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers and the
principle of lawyer-client confidentiality. Lawyers present in the office were
forced to crouch beneath their desks during the raid and the two female
employees were beaten.
“The
violent raid on Nabil Adib’s human rights law firm is the latest in a catalogue
of attacks by Sudan’s security agency against independent Sudanese civil society.
Sudanese authorities must immediately cease all arbitrary restrictions and
abuses against human rights defenders, student activists and others”, said Mossaad Mohamed Ali of ACJPS. 
The lawyers and employees were
released at around 8pm the same day after interrogations at NISS offices in
Khartoum North, but the 10 student activists remain detained incommunicado and
without charge. Eight male students are currently detained at the political
section of the NISS nearby to Shendi Bus Station in Khartoum North, while two
female students detained during the raid have been transferred to a section of
Omdurman Women’s Prison run by the NISS.
In a separate incident two days
later on May 7, two other student activists who were also dismissed from
studies at the University of Khartoum, Muafaq Mohamed Abdul Hafiz and Mohamed
Omer Hamid, were detained by the NISS in Um Dagarsy village, Al Jazeera
state. It is thought that the two men, who were reportedly detained whilst on
route to Al Gadarif state, have since been transferred to NISS custody in
Khartoum, although authorities have refused to disclose their whereabouts. 
There are also serious safety
concerns for three students detained incommunicado in police custody in
connection with the recent protests at the University of Khartoum. Requests by
lawyers to visit their clients have been denied. Asim Omer, Adam
Hassan Mohamadien and Fatih Mohamed Abdu Ismail, were arrested by
the NISS in three separate incidents between May 2 and 5, and later transferred
to police custody. Lawyers have been informed that their clients are charged
under Article 130 (murder) of the 1991 Criminal Act in connection with an
attack on a police officer during a protest at the University of Khartoum. 
The lack of access for lawyers
and family members to the 12 students detained in NISS custody and three others
now in police custody, together with the well-documented use by the NISS of
torture and other forms of ill-treatment against detainees, gives rise to
serious concerns for their safety.
“Our organisations call on the Sudanese authorities to immediately
guarantee the safety of the student detainees, grant them immediate and
unequivocal access to their lawyers and family members, and release them in the
absence of valid legal charges consistent with international standards”, said Karim Lahidji, President
of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH). 
A total of 17 students were
dismissed from study at the University of Khartoum following their
participation in nationwide
student protests that started at the University of Khartoum on April 13, 2016.
Six students were dismissed permanently and 11 others suspended from studies
for two years. On April 19 and 27, 2016, two student activists, Abubakar Hassan and Mohamed al-Sadiq Wayo were killed in two separate incidents when
government forces used live ammunition to disperse demonstrators on two
university campuses. 
“We are deeply concerned by
the systematic pattern of abuse by Sudan’s security agency and repeated resort
to the excessive use of force by Sudanese authorities to suppress peaceful
social movements. Sudanese authorities must immediately put an end to the
on-going crackdown against student activists in the country and ensure justice
and reparations for all victims of human rights violations”,
Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary
General. 
Further
information 
Names
of students detained incommunicado by the NISS following armed raid on Nabil
Adib’s law office on May 5
1.    
Hassan
Alday Mohammed, (m), University of Khartoum Faculty of Law, Level 4, dismissed
from studies. 
2.    
Mohammed
Almahjoub Otaiba, (m), University of Khartoum Faculty of Law, Level 4,
suspended from studies for 2 years. 
3.    
Hamid
Omar Digno, (m), University of Khartoum, brother of student Mohamed Omer Hamid
who was dismissed from studies at the University of Khartoum. 
4.    
Mudasir
Tayseer Mudasir, (m), University of Khartoum Faculty of Science, Level 5,
suspended from studies for 2 years. 
5.    
Mai
Adil Ibrahim, (f), University of Khartoum Faculty of Engineering, Level 4,
suspended from studies for 2 years. 
6.    
Hussein
Yahya Haran, (m), University of Khartoum Faculty of Science, Level 4, suspended
from studies for 2 years. 
7.    
Badr
Alddin Salah Mohammed, (m), University of Khartoum, Faculty of Economics­,
Level 1, suspended from studies for 2 years. 
8.    
Wifag
Gurashi, (f), University of Khartoum Faculty of Arts, Level 3, dismissed from
studies. 
The names of two other male students detained from
Nabil Adib’s law offices are not disclosed. 
Names of students detained in Al Jazeera State on May 7, currently
detained incommunicado by the NISS in Khartoum 
1.    
Muafaq Mohamed Abdul Hafiz, (m), University
of Khartoum, dismissed from studies. 
2.    
Mohamed Omer Hamid, (m), dismissed from
studies. 
Names of students detained incommunicado in police custody in Khartoum
1.    
Asim Omer, (m), University of Khartoum,
arrested by the NISS in front of the University of Khartoum on 2 May 2016,
later transferred to police custody. 
2.    
Adam Hassan Mohamadien, (m), University of
Khartoum, arrested by the NISS from a public garden in Omdurman on 5 May 2016,
later transferred to police custody. 
3.    
Fatih Mohamed Abdu Ismail, (m), University of
Khartoum, suspended from studies for 2 years, location and date of detention
unclear, currently in police custody. 
For more information, please contact:
FIDH: Arthur Manet/Audrey Couprie: + 33 (0) 1
43 55 25 18
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39ACJPS: Mossaad Mohamed Ali, Executive
Director, +256 779584542 or Katherine Perks, Programme Director, +256
775072136, info@acjps.org 