Myanmar (ex-Burma):  Conditional release of Mr. Kyaw Hla Aung
October 15, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Myanmar (ex-Burma) / 2014 / OctoberMyanmar (ex-Burma): Conditional release of Mr. Kyaw Hla AungNew
information
MMR
004 / 0713 / OBS 067.2
Conditional
release 
Burma/Myanmar
October 15, 2014
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Burma/Myanmar.
 
New
Information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the release of
Mr. Kyaw Hla Aung, a 75-year old Rohingya human rights defender.
 
According to
the information received, on October 7, Mr. Kyaw Hla Aung was released from the
Sittwe Prison in Arakan/Rakhine State. He was granted a presidential amnesty in
accordance with Section 401 of the Criminal code which also authorises the
President to order Mr. Kyaw Hla Aung to serve the remainder of his original
sentence if he fails to fulfil the conditions of his release. Before being
released, Mr. Kyaw Hla Aung had to sign a pledge committing not to take part in
other “crimes or illegal activities”.
 
Kyaw Hla
Aung had been detained since July 15, 2013, when authorities in Sittwe Township
arrested him in connection with a protest by internally displaced Rohingya
against attempts by the government to register them as ‘Bengali’ in April 2013.
On September 26, 2014, the Sittwe District Court sentenced Kyaw Hla Aung to one
year and six months in prison on charges of rioting in connection with the
April 2013 protest.
 
The Observatory
welcomes the release of Mr. Kyaw Hla Aung and thanks all the individuals,
institutions, and organisations that intervened in his favour. However, the
Observatory regrets that he was arbitrarily detained for more than a year
before being released and that his released was conditional and reiterates its
concern about the criminalisation of human rights defenders who are as accused
of taking part in crimes and illegal activities.
 
The
Observatory more generally reiterates its call on the Burmese authorities to
put an end to all acts of harassment – including at the judicial level –
against all human rights defenders in Burma, and to comply with all
international human rights standards and international instruments ratified by
Burma, in particular the United Nations (UN) Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998.
 
Background
information:
 
In 1986, Mr.
Kyaw Hla Aung was imprisoned for two years for writing an appeal to the
authorities on behalf of local farmers whose land had been confiscated. In
1990, he was arrested during a crackdown on Rohingya activists and spent the
next 10 years in jail. In June 2012, Government authorities detained him, along
with several other Rohingya aid workers, for his alleged involvement in the
sectarian unrest that hit Arakan State. He was released in August 2012.
 
On April 26, 2013, the local government
of Arakan/Rakhine State undertook a survey of Muslim IDPs in Sittwe Township in
order to provide the authorities with population data. The authorities required
Muslim Rohingya to be recorded as “Bengalis,” a term that is perceived as
derogatory and that the government routinely uses to describe Rohingya.
 
After some members of the community
being surveyed contested being called “Bengali”, violence ensued. Clashes
between Rohingya IDPs and immigration officials during the protests forced the
authorities to suspend the registration process.
 
The events related to April 26 have
since been used as a pretext to falsely prosecute Mr. Kyaw Hla Aung.
 
Mr. Kyaw Hla Aung was re-arrested on
July 15, 2013 by police officers in Sittwe Township. He was arbitrarily
detained without charges at Sittwe Police Station No. 1 and denied access to
his family and lawyers.
 
On September
26, 2014, Mr. Kyaw Hla Aung was sentenced by the Sittwe District Court to one
year and six months in prison on charges of rioting (Article 147 of the
Criminal Code) in connection with the April 26, 2013 protest at Thetkalpyin IDP
camp in Sittwe Township. However, Mr. Kyaw Hla Aung was not present during the
protest and had, in fact, tried to contact camp leaders in order to advise them
to keep the demonstration peaceful.
 
Former United Nations Special
Rapporteur on human rights in Burma Tomás Ojea Quintana, who repeatedly called
for Mr. Kyaw Hla Aung’s release, described him as a prisoner of conscience and
said his detention was arbitrary. Mr. Kyaw Hla Aung suffers from hypertension
and stomach problems that require regular medication.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write
to the authorities of Burma, urging them to:
 
i.              
Guarantee in all circumstances the
physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Kyaw Hla Aung, as well as of all human rights defenders in
Burma/Myanmar;
 
ii.             
Put an end to acts of any acts of
harassment, including judicial harassment, against him as well as against all
human rights defenders in Burma/Myanmar;
 
iii.           
Comply with all the provisions of
the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular with
its: 
-       
Article 1, which provides that
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-       
Article 6(a), which foresees that
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
participate in peaceful activities against violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms”;
-       
Article 12.2, which provides that
“the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the
competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others,
against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to
in the present Declaration”;
 
Addresses:
 
·      
U Thein Sein, President
of Myanmar, President Office, Office No.18, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR; Fax: + 95 1 652
624
·      
Lt. Gen Ko Ko, Minister
for Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Office No. 10, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR;
Fax: +95 67 412 439
·      
U Win Mra, Chairman of
the Myanmar National Human Rights Commission, 27 Pyay Road, Hline Township,
Yangon, Republic of the Union of Myanmar; Fax: +95-1-659668
·      
Dr. Tun Shin, Attorney
General, Office of the Attorney General, Office No. 25, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR;
Fax: +95 67 404 146/ 106
·      
U Tun Tun Oo, Chief
Justice, Office of the Supreme Court, Office No. 24, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR; Fax: +
95 67 404 059
·      
U Kyaw Kyaw Htun,
Director General, Myanmar Police Force, Ministry of Home Affairs, Office No.
10, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR; Fax: +951 549 663 / 549 208
·      
H.E. Mr. Maung Wai,
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative to the
United Nations in Geneva, Avenue Blanc 47, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22
732 89 19, +41 22 732 73 77, Email: mission@myanmargeneva.org
·      
Embassy of Myanmar in
Brussels, Boulevard Général Wahis 9, 1030 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 (0)32 2
705 50 48, Email: mebrussels@skynet.be
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Burma in your respective
countries. 