Thailand:  Charges against Ms. Pornpen, Mr. Somchai and Ms. Anchana for publishing a report on torture
August  1, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2016 / AugustThailand: Charges against Ms. Pornpen, Mr. Somchai and Ms. Anchana for publishing a report on tortureTHA 003 /
0816 / OBS 066
Judicial Harassment /
Intimidation
Thailand
August 1, 2016
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Thailand.
Description of the situation:The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
of charges brought against Ms. Pornpen
Khongkachonkiet, Chair of Amnesty International Thailand and Director of
Cross Cultural Foundation (CrCF)[1], Mr. Somchai
Homlaor, a prominent lawyer and senior legal
advisor to CrCF, and
Ms. Anchana Heemmina, founder and Director of the organization Duay
Jai Group (Hearty Support Group)[2], who co-edited the report “Torture and Ill-treatment in
the Deep South Documented in 2014-2015”, published by CrCF,
Duay Jai Group, and Patani Human Rights Organization Network (HAP) on February
10, 2016[3].
According to the
information received, on July 26, 2016, officers from the Pattani Police
Station charged Ms. Pornpen, Ms. Anchana, and Mr. Somchai with “criminal
defamation” under Articles 326[4]
and 328[5]
of the Criminal Code and “computer-related crimes” under Article 14.1[6]
of the 2007 Computer Crimes Act for allegedly publishing and uploading false
information to the Internet in connection with the aforementioned report. The
three human rights defenders denied all charges and police allowed them to
submit a written statement in their defence within 60 days, while undertaking further investigation on the case. If
convicted, they could face up to five years in prison and a fine of 200,000
baht (approximately 5,125 euros).
On June 26, 2016, the
three human rights defenders were summoned by police at the Pattani Police
Station following a complaint filed against them on June 8 by the Thai Army’s
Internal Security Operations Command Region 4 (ISOC 4)[7].
However, the police interrogation was postponed until July 26, 2016[8].
The Observatory
strongly condemns the ongoing judicial harassment of Ms. Pornpen, Ms. Anchana,
and Mr. Somchai, which only aims at sanctioning their legitimate human rights
activities, particularly their documentation and advocacy work on the issue of
torture. The Observatory calls upon the Thai authorities to immediately
drop all charges against them.
Until all charges are dropped, the Observatory
also urges the Thai authorities to ensure that all judicial proceedings against
them are carried out in full compliance with their right to a fair trial, as
provided for under international law.
Background information:
Before publishing the
report, the three human right defenders tried to engage with the authorities
and raise their awareness regarding the alleged cases of torture and
ill-treatment documented in the report. They sent the report to Lt. Gen. Wiwat
Pathompak, Commander of the 4th Army Region, on January 8, 2016. However,
the high-ranking military officers publicly denied the accuracy of the report
and questioned the reliability of the civil society organisations that produced
it.
In addition, after the
release of the report, seven ISOC officers summoned Ms. Anchana to appear for questioning
in relation to its publication at the Sirinthon Army Camp in Yala Province, for two
and half hours. The officers conveyed their discontent with the report and requested
that in the future she submit all of her publications to ISOC before they are
released, which Ms. Anchana refused.
On February 19, 2016, at
about 5pm, a group of 10 uniformed men visited Ms. Anchana’s home, finding
there only her mother. They claimed to be border police officers, and without
presenting a warrant questioned Ms. Anchana’s mother about her daughter and
reportedly took pictures of her and the house. 
In September 2014, Ms.
Pornpen was charged with “criminal defamation” by Army Task Force 41 in
connection with her documentation and advocacy work concerning allegations of
Army torture in Thailand’s ‘Deep South’. The case was eventually dropped in
June 2015 following the decision of the State Prosecutor.
Actions requested: 

Please write to the authorities of Thailand asking them to: 

i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Pornpen
Khongkachonkiet, Ms. Anchana Heemmina, and Mr. Somchai Homlaor as well as of all human rights
defenders in Thailand;

ii. Immediately drop all charges against Ms. Pornpen, Ms.
Anchana, and Mr. Somchai
and put an end to all acts of judicial harassment against them and all human
rights defenders in Thailand;

iii. Put an end to all acts of torture and ill treatment in the country,
properly investigate them, and prosecute perpetrators, in compliance with
Thailand’s international human rights commitments.

iv. Put an end to the prosecution of civilians in military courts in accordance
with international human rights law that prohibits governments from using
military courts to try civilians when civilian courts are functioning; 

v. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998,
especially its Articles 1 and 12.2; 

vi. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Thailand.
Addresses:
·    
Gen
Prayuth Chan-ocha, Prime Minister of Thailand, Fax: +66 (0) 2 282 5131
·    
Don
Pramudwinai, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax: +66 (0) 2 643 5320; Email: minister@mfa.go.th
·    
Gen
Paiboon Khumchaya, Minister of Justice, Fax: +66 (0) 2 953 0503
·    
Pol
Gen Somyot Poompanmoung, Commissioner-General of the Royal Thai Police, Fax:
+66 (0) 2 251 5956 / +66 (0) 2 251 8702
·    
Mr.
Wat Tingsamit, Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission of Thailand;
Email: help@nhrc.or.th
·    
H.E. Mr. Thani Thongphakdi,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission
of Thailand to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: + 41 22 715 10
00 / 10 02; Email: mission.thailand@ties.itu.int
·    
H.E.
Ms. Busaya Mathelin, Ambassador, Embassy of Thailand in
Brussels, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 648 30 66; Email: thaibxl@thaiembassy.be
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy
of Thailand in your respective country.
***
Geneva-Paris,
August 1, 2016 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
The Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH partnership, is dedicated to the
protection of human rights defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in
their time of need. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
To contact
the Observatory, call the emergency line:
•       E-mail:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org
•       Tel
and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
•      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25
18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80



[1]                                 Cross
Cultural Foundation (CrCF) is an organization that monitors and documents cases
of torture and ill-treatment in Thailand. 


[2]                
Duay
Jai Group is an organization that
provides rehabilitation services for victims of torture and support for their
families.


[3]                The
report concerns 54 allegations of torture and ill-treatment committed by the
Royal Thai police and Royal Thai army against members of the Muslim Malay
minority arrested for their alleged involvement with insurgent groups in the
conflictive southern region of the country, between 2014 and 2015.


[4]                
Article
326 of the Criminal Code states: “Whoever, imputes anything to the other
person before a third person in a manner likely to impair
the reputation of such other person or to expose such other
person to be hated or scorned, is said to commit defamation, and shall be
punished with imprisonment not exceeding one year or fined not exceeding
twenty thousand baht, or both.”


[5]            Article 328 of the Criminal Code
states: “If the offence of defamation be committed
by means of publication of a document, drawing, painting, cinematography film,
picture or letters made visible by any means, gramophone record or an other
recording instruments, recording picture or letters, or by broadcasting or
spreading picture, or by propagation by any other means, the offender shall be
punished with imprisonment not exceeding two years and fined not exceeding two
hundred thousand baht.”


[6]            Article 14.1 of the
Computer Crimes Act states: “Whoever commits the following offences, shall be punished
with imprisonment not exceeding five years or a fine not exceeding on hundred
thousand baht or both: (1) input, into computer system, forged computer data in
whole or in part or false computer data in a manner likely to cause injury to
another person or the public.”


[7]                Internal
Security Operations Command (ISOC) is a unit of the Thai military
devoted to national security. ISOC 4 is responsible for security operations in
the southern provinces.


[8]            See the Observatory Joint
Statement of June 12, 2016. 