Malaysia:  Towards a Malaysian Ratification of the Convention against Torture
September 25, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / Malaysia / 2018 / SeptemberMalaysia: Towards a Malaysian Ratification of the Convention against Torture
JOINT
STATEMENT
TOWARDS
A MALAYSIAN RATIFICATION OF THE CONVENTION AGAINST TORTURE
We Welcome the Government’s
Commitment to Universal Ratification 
Geneva - Selangor, 25 September 2018: The World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) and Suaram welcome
the commitment of the Government of Malaysia and the Minister of Foreign
Affairs Dato Saifuddin Abdullah to ratify the United Nations Convention against
Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment (UNCAT).
OMCT and Suaram stand ready to provide any support needed in this process. 
We applaud the human rights reforms within the Government
Coalition Pakatan Harapan manifesto, which includes the ratification of the six
remaining UN core human rights treaties,[1]
the strengthening of the National Human Rights Commission of Malaysia (SUHAKAM),
and the ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights (AICHR). These are
important signals that the Malaysian government is sending out in an
increasingly human rights-aversive climate. 
We also acknowledge the advocacy efforts by the
ACT4CAT coalition which comprises SUHAKAM, the Malaysian Bar, Amnesty
International Malaysia, Lawyers for Liberty, and SUARAM with regards to
Malaysia’s ratification of UNCAT. The ACT4CAT coalition has coordinated high
level meetings with the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Religious Authorities
for the Federal Territories, with representatives of the Committee against
Torture and delegates from Indonesia who are involved in the implementation of
UNCAT.
In view of the abovementioned developments, we encourage
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to proceed with the ratification of the UNCAT and
to engage with the Committee against Torture. In addition, issuing a standing
open invitation to all Special Procedures of the Human Rights Council would be
a welcome step. 
We also encourage the Government of Malaysia to
start giving due consideration to the provisions of UNCAT to prepare a Malaysian
ratification. In particular, incidences of public corporal punishment and other
cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment or punishment ought to be suspended and
criminalized. The perpetrators should be held to account and the victims entitled
to reparation. 
The long-standing issue of torture in police
custody and inhuman treatment in prisons and immigration detention centers
should also be prioritized as critical areas. Recommendations by SUHAKAM and
the Enforcement Agency Integrity Commission (EAIC) on these matters should be
adopted to ensure that Malaysia’s ratification and implementation of UNCAT is not
shadowed by past abuses.
We reiterate our support to the Malaysian
government in their work against torture, to systematically investigate all
allegations of torture and other forms of ill-treatment, to prosecute and
punish the perpetrators and to provide redress to the victims.
OMCT and SUARAM appreciate the scale of reform the Government of Malaysia is undertaking and are ready to provide
our full support for Malaysia’s ratification of UNCAT and other international
human rights treaties. 
For further information:
SUARAM:

Sevan Doraisamy
Executive Director,
SUARAM
ed@suaram.net
+60169708370
OMCT:

Ylva L. Hartmann
Human Rights Adviser, OMCT
ylh@omct.org
+41 22 809 49 26
Stella Anastasia
Human Rights Officer and Network Coordinator,
OMCT
sa@omct.org
+41 22 809 49 28



[1]
The Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment
and Punishment, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the
International Convention Against All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the
International Convention on the Protection of Migrant Workers and Members of
their Families and the International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance. 