Join us for the panel discussion "Against the shrinking space - How do we protect and promote an enabling environment for civil society?" - 13th March 2014
March  6, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Events / 2014 / MarchJoin us for the panel discussion "Against the shrinking space - How do we protect and promote an enabling environment for civil society?" - 13th March 2014

You can download the flyer
for the side event here.



25th
Regular Session of the UN Human Rights Council
 
 ACT Alliance and CIDSE
in
cooperation
with
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), the Permanent Missions of Sweden, Ireland and the Czech Republic
 cordially
invite you to the panel discussion
Against the shrinking space -
How do we protect and promote an enabling environment
for civil society?
Thursday,
13 March 2014
Palais
des Nations, Room XXI
11.00h
- 12.30h
 
The importance of a vibrant, strong
and free civil society to achieving sustainable, human development has been
highlighted numerous times in recent years by many international organizations,
fora and policy documents. However, in more and more countries civil society
organizations (CSOs) are faced with the challenge of working under increasing
constraints, as many governments move to limit operational and political space
for civil society: Judicial and extra-judicial measures ranging from new NGO
laws restricting on certain types of activities and funding to intimidation,
excessive use of force, arbitrary detention, enforced disappearances and
extra-judicial killings are routinely employed to prevent CSOs from speaking
out against injustice, articulating the concerns of citizens and providing a
voice for the most vulnerable and marginalized in society. This trend not only
severely hampers CSOs’ ability to serve as catalyst for democratic change, but
also threatens to reverse hard-won gains towards democracy.  In order to
move beyond a mere analysis of problems and challenges, the CIDSE Working Group
on Enabling Environment and the ACT Alliance Community of Practice on Human
Rights in Development decided to conduct research to identify stakeholder
approaches, strategies and interventions that contribute positively to protect
and expand the space for civil society.
 
In this side event, we will present
the most important findings of the study Space for Civil Society – How to
Protect and Expand an Enabling Environment, look specifically to the
challenges and experiences of our partners from Colombia and Zimbabwe as well as
discuss the responsibility of states and the international community to protect
and ensure an open dialogue in societies to enable civil society action.
 
 
Panelists:                              Ana Maria Rodriguez,
Commission of Jurists, Colombia
 
                                             Rose
Hanzi, Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights, Zimbabwe
 
                                             Maina
Kiai, United Nations Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful
assembly and of association
 
Introduction/Chair:               Julia Duchrow, Bread
for the World
 
Refreshments
will be provided after the discussion. 