Congo, Democratic Republic:  Congo (DRC) : Arbitrary detention of Mr. Mukadi Bonyi
June 13, 2006
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Congo, Democratic Republic / 2006 / JuneCongo, Democratic Republic: Congo (DRC) : Arbitrary detention of Mr. Mukadi BonyiCase COD 130606 Arbitrary arrest and detention  The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). Brief description of the situation: The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the African Association for the Protection of Human Rights (Association africaine de défense des droits de l’homme - ASADHO), members of the SOS torture network, of the arbitrary arrest and detention of Mr. Mukadi Bonyi, lawyer at the Supreme Court of Justice and member of the Council of the Union for the reconstruction of Congo (Conseil de l’Union pour la reconstruction du Congo - UREC), a political party.  According to the information received, on 12 June 2006 at 1.30 p.m. Mr. Mukadi went to the office of the special services of the national police located in the building Kin-Mazière in the Gombe district, following an invitation of these services. After being interogated, Mr. Mukadi was arrested and detained at the dungeons of the special services.  Mr. Mukadi Bonyi is alleged to be accused of having received 10.000 $ US in order to, according to the special services, buy weapons destined to mercenaries.  The International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its grave concern over the conditions of the arrest and detention of Mr. Mukadi Bonyi. Besides his detention has lasted for more than the 48 hours in which time a detainee should be brought before the public prosecutor.  The OMCT urges the Congolese authorities to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Mukadi Bonyi. Action requested:Please write to the Congolese authorities and ask them to: 1.	Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Mukadi Bonyi; 2.	Guarantee that Mr. Mukadi Bonyi has access to his family, his lawyers and, if necessary, to a doctor; 3.	Order his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges, or, if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times; 4.	Guarantee a thorough and impartial investigation into these events; 5.	Guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards. Addresses:Le Président de la République, S.E. Joseph Kabila, Présidence de la République, Kinshasa-Ngaliema, République Démocratique du Congo, E-mail: upp@ic.cd  Le Vice-Président de la République en Charge de la Commission Politique, Défense et Sécurité, M. Azarias Ruberwa Manywa, Cabinet du Vice-Président de la République, avenue roi Baudouin ex-3Z, Kinshasa/Gombe, République Démocratique du Congo, Email : vice_presidence.rdc@ic.cd  Le Ministre des Affaires Etrangères et de la Coopération Internationale, M. Ramazani Baya, Cabinet du Ministre, bâtiment du Ministère des Affaires Etrangères, Kinshasa/Gombe, République Démocratique du Congo  Le Ministre de la Justice et Garde des Sceaux, M. Kisimba Ngoy, Ministère de la Justice et Garde des Sceaux, BP 3137, Kinshasa Gombé, République Démocratique du Congo, E-mail: minjustrdc@yahoo.fr  Le Ministre de l’Intérieur, Ministère de l’Intérieur, Fax: +243 88 02 042, E-mail: mininterieur@yahoo.fr  La Ministre des Droits Humains, Mme Marie-Madeleine Kalala, Cabinet du Ministre, Boulevard du 30 juin, Kinshasa/Gombe, République Démocratique du Congo, Fax: 00 243 12 20 664, Email: min_droitshumains@yahoo.fr ou mindroits_humains@yahoo.fr  Observatoire National des Droits de l’Homme (ONDH), Cabinet du Président, avenue Sendwe, Kinshasa/Kalamu, République Démocratique du Congo, Tél: +243 98313740 / + 243 98271199 / + 243 98407633  M. Théo Kiakwima, Directeur adjoint de l’Agence Nationale des Renseignements, Tel : + 243 995 8610  Ambassadeur, Antoine Mindua Kesia-Mbe, Mission permanente de la République démocratique du Congo, Avenue de Budé 18, 1202 Genève, Suisse, e-mail : missionrdc@bluewin.ch, Fax : +4122 740.16.82  Ambassade de la République Démocratique du Congo à Bruxelles, Avenue Foestraets, 6, 1180 Bruxelles. Tel : + 32 2 375 47 96, Fax : + 32 2 372 23 48  Prière d’écrire aux représentations diplomatiques de la République Démocratique du Congo dans vos pays respectifs.  *** Geneva, 13 June 2006  Kindly inform OMCT of any action undertaken quoting the code number of this appeal in your reply. 