Sri Lanka: Gampola police shoot and kill Suranga Sampath
February  9, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sri Lanka / 2004 / FebruarySri Lanka: Sri Lanka: Gampola police shoot and kill Suranga SampathCase LKA 090204 Ill-treatment / Indiscriminate use of force / Extra-judicial execution   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sri Lanka.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC), a member of the OMCT network, of the shooting of the Gampola police into a crowd, resulting  in the death of Dissanayake Mudiayanselage Suranga Sampath.   According to the information received, a clash took place between two groups of young people who had gone to see a musical show at the paddy field of Mahara, Angammana, Gampola on 10 January 2004. As a result of this clash, the police moved in and a large number of spectators were assaulted by these police officers, who are attached to the Gampola police station. Some of them were then reportedly detained, and later mercilessly beaten. While some of the spectators were being detained, others decided to sit at the junction to the new Gampola bridge until the detained were released. A quarrel erupted and so the police tried to disperse them.  Finding it difficult to disperse them, the officers rushed back to the police station and returned with about ten persons, in uniform as well as civilian clothing, with firearms. The police then advanced, while shouting and firing at the crowd, scattering it. The police then arrived at the place of the musical show, where Dissanayake Mudiayanselage Suranga Sampath and the others were. A tear gas can fell near them. A few moments later Suranga fell on the ground struck by a bullet fired by the police. Suranga's friends carried him to a bush and then fled the area. After the officers had left, Suranga's friends returned and telephoned Gampola Municipal Member Mr. Mahesan Pelpola. They took Suranga to the Gampola hospital, where the doctor pronounced him dead.  The post mortem was conducted in Kandy on 12 January 2004 and the body was then handed over to Suranga's family. Until the funeral was over security was provided to Gampola town by the army and the police.   The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned by this reported extra-judicial execution and calls on the authorities to immediately launch an investigation into these events and bring the perpetrators of these acts to justice. The suspected perpetrators should be suspended from their service at the police station during the investigation. OMCT also calls on the authorities to guarantee that adequate reparation is provided to the victim’s family, and that adequate medical assistance is given to all persons injured during these events.   Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Sri Lanka urging them to:  i.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these events, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; ii.	guarantee adequate reparation to Dissanayake Mudiayanselage Suranga Sampath’s family and to all other persons injured by the police during these events put an immediate end to the persecution and harassment to which they are being subjected; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	Her Excellency President Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga, President's House, Colombo 3, Sri Lanka. Fax: + 94 1 333703, E-mail: for_min@sri.lanka.net ·	Hon. Prime Minister Ranil Wickremasinghe, Cambridge Place, Colombo 7, Sri Lanka. Fax: + 94 1575 454/1 682905. E-mail: secpm@sltnet.lk, bradmanw@slt.lk  ·	Hon. Mr. K. C. Kamalasabesan, Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12, Sri Lanka. Fax: + 94 1 436-421, E-mail: attorney@sri.lanka.net or counsel@sri.lanka.net ·	Honourable Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, 37, Kirula Place, Colombo 5. Sri Lanka. Fax: + 94 1 437680 ·	Honourable Minister of Interior John Amaratunga, Colombo, Fax: + 94 1387 526, + 94 1698 282 ·	Inspector General of Police, Mr. T. E. Anandarajah, New Secretariat, Colombo 1, Sri Lanka, Fax: 0094 1 446174 ·	Mr. Ranjith Abeysuriya PC, Chairman, National Police Commission, 10 A, Flower Road, Colombo 7, Sri Lanka, Fax: +941 674148  Please also write to the embassies of Sri Lanka in your respective country.  Geneva, February 9th, 2004  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 