Egypt:  Ongoing judicial harassment of Ms. Azza Soliman
March 25, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2015 / MarchEgypt: Ongoing judicial harassment of Ms. Azza SolimanNew
information
EGY 001 / 0115 / OBS 007.1
Judicial harassment
Egypt
March 25, 2015
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT),
requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Egypt.
New information:
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the judicial harassment of Ms. Azza Soliman, human rights lawyer
and founder of the Centre for Egyptian Women Legal Aid (CEWLA).
On March 23, 2015, Ms. Soliman received information
that she was formally charged with “unauthorised protesting”, and “breach of
security and public order”. Along with Ms. Soliman, sixteen others were
charged, including Ms. Nagwa Abbass, member of the Socialist Popular Alliance
Party. The first hearing was scheduled on April 4, 2015, before the Abdeen
Misdemeanor Court.
These charges against Ms. Soliman are linked with her
testimony denouncing the violent dispersal on January 24, 2015 of a protest
commemorating the January 25 Revolution, which led to the shooting of political
activist Ms. Shaimaa El Sabbagh. Ms. Soliman did not take part in the protest,
but was coincidentally in the same area and witnessed the dispersal and the
shooting of the activist (see background information).
This case is an illustration of a wider trend of
repression against human rights defenders in Egypt. The Observatory recalls in
particular that the restrictive protest law, which bans gatherings of ten or
more people without a permit issued by the authorities, has been repeatedly
used by the authorities as a tool to harass and imprison human rights
defenders.
The Observatory strongly condemns the judicial harassment against Ms.
Soliman, which only aims at sanctioning her recent reports on human rights
violations, as part of her legitimate human rights activities. The Observatory
calls on the authorities to drop all charges held against her, and put an immediate
end to this judicial harassment.
Background information:
On January 24, 2015, Ms. Soliman voluntarily went to
the Public Prosecution's office to give her testimony regarding the violent
dispersal of a protest organised by the political party Popular Alliance on the
same day by security forces, which led to the death of political activist, Ms.
Shaimaa El Sabbagh. Ms. Soliman did not take part in the protest, but was
coincidentally in the same area and witnessed the dispersal and the shooting of
the activist.
After waiting several hours at the Public
Prosecution's office, Ms. Soliman was finally able to give her testimony,
pointing to the responsibility of the police for the death of the activist. Ms.
Soliman also filed a complaint accusing the Minister of Interior and security
forces of having violently dispersed the peaceful protest.
Upon completion of her testimony, the prosecutor then
interrogated her, and informed her that he was going to press charges against
her and four other witnesses for “illegal gathering” and “participating in a
protest that harmed public security”. Ms. Soliman was released along with the
other four, pending investigation.
Actions
requested:Please write to the authorities of Egypt asking them
to:
i.       Drop all charges against Ms. Azza Soliman and put an
end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against her and
all human rights defenders in Egypt;
ii.      Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of Ms. Azza Soliman and all human rights defenders in
Egypt;
iii.     Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular with:
-         
its
Article 1, which provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”;
-         
its
Article 5(a): “For the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in association
with others, at the national and international levels (a) To meet or assemble
peacefully”
-         
its
Article 6(a), which foresees that “everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, to participate in peaceful activities against
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms”;
-         
its
Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures
to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually
and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
iv.    Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by Egypt.
Addresses
·        
President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, H.E. Abdel
Fattah el-Sisi, Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 23901998
·        
Prime Minister, Mr. Ibrahim Mehleb, Magles El Shaab
Street, Kasr El Aini Street, Cairo, Egypt. Fax: + 202 2735 6449 / 27958016.
Email: primemin@idsc.gov.eg
·        
Minister of the Interior, General Mohamed Ibrahim
Moustafa, Ministry of the Interior, El-Sheikh Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo,
Egypt, E-mail: moi1@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2579 2031 / 2794
5529
·        
Minister of Justice, Mr. Mahfouz Saber, Ministry of
Justice, Magles El Saeb Street, Wezaret Al Adl, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2795 8103
·        
Public Prosecutor, Counsellor Hisham Barakat Dar
al-Qadha al-Ali, Ramses Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 2577 4716
·        
Mr. Mohamed Fayeq, President of the National Council
For Human Rights, Fax: + 202 25747497 / 25747670. Email: nchr@nchr.org.eg
·        
H.E. Ms.
Wafaa Bassim, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations in
Geneva, 49 avenue Blanc, 1202 Genève, Switzerland, Email: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41 22 738 44 15
·        
Embassy
of Egypt in Brussels, 19 avenue de l’Uruguay, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32
2 675.58.88; Email: embassy.egypt@skynet.bePlease also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies
of Egypt in your respective country.
***
Paris-Geneva, March
25, 2015
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.
The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the
protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in
their time of need.
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·         E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·        
Tel and fax FIDH + 33
(0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
·        
Tel and fax OMCT + 41
(0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29 