Iran:  Iran: Fear of torture of Mr. Akbar Ganji, arbitrarily detained
October 28, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2005 / OctoberIran: Iran: Fear of torture of Mr. Akbar Ganji, arbitrarily detainedOpen Letter to the President of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Mr. Mahmoud Ahmadinejad Paris-Geneva, October 28, 2005   Re: Fear of torture of Mr. Akbar Ganji, arbitrarily detained  Dear Sir,  The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation against Torture (OMCT), expresses its deep concern about the continuing detention and reported ill-treatment and torture inflicted on Mr. Akbar Ganji, a journalist of the daily newspaper Sobh-e-Emrooz and human rights defender.  Mr. Akbar Ganji was arrested in April 2000 and sentenced to six  years in prison in July 2001 on the charge of “threatening national security and propaganda against the institutions of the Islamic State”. He was accused of having revealed details concerning the murder of intellectuals and opponents to the regime at the end of 1998, and of having accused certain politicians of being involved.  Mr. Akbar Ganji carried out a hunger strike in order to protest against his detention, from June 11 to August 22 2005, when he was transferred to the hospital. He lost 25 kg and has not recovered since then.  The Observatory has recently been informed that Mr. Akbar Ganji was tortured and ill-treated during two days when he was hospitalised, with the objective of compelling him to renounce to his positions and to promise allegiance to the Supreme Leader. After he refused, he was taken back to the Evin prison on September 3, 2005. During the transfer, in the car, Mr. Ganji’s eyes were blindfolded and he was nearly strangulated by the person accompanying him in order to frighten him.  Since then, Mr. Ganji is detained in solitary confinement in a special wing of the Evin prison. It should be reminded that the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, on visit in Iran in February 2003, was refused access to that wing by secret service agents, and could consequently not visit this “prison within a prison” where mostly political prisoners seem to be detained. Mr. Akbar Ganji was only allowed one visit, on October 17, 2005, by his wife, his mother and one of his lawyers. His physical and psychological health is extremely poor and the Observatory fears for his life.  Mr. Akbar Ganji’s arbitrary detention constitutes a blatant violation of the Islamic Republic’s international human rights commitments and seriously tarnishes the country’s reputation. The Observatory recalls that on September 16, 2005, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression called on the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to release him without further delay. Previously, on July 15, 2005, the Special Rapporteurs on the right to health, on the right to freedom of opinion and expression, and on torture, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on human rights defenders, and the Chairperson of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention had appealed in a joint statement to the Government to guarantee Mr. Ganji’s rights not to be arbitrarily deprived of his liberty (See Observatory Urgent Appeal IRN 001/0004/OBS 030.7).  The Observatory urges you, as the President of the Islamic Republic of Iran, to guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Akbar Ganji, to ensure his immediate and unconditional release, and to allow him to receive the medical care he urgently needs.  In the hope you will take these considerations and requests into account,  We remain,   Sidiki KABA			 	President of FIDH	  	Eric SOTTAS 	Director of OMCT 