Lebanon:  Lebanon: Acts of slandering and intimidation against Mr. Ghassan Abdallah
December 27, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Lebanon / 2005 / DecemberLebanon: Lebanon: Acts of slandering and intimidation against Mr. Ghassan AbdallahURGENT APPEAL – THE OBSERVATORY   LBN 001 / 1205 / OBS 131Threats / Defamation LEBANON December 27, 2005  The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Lebanon.  Brief description of the situation: The Observatory has been informed by the Palestinian Human Rights Organisation (PHRO), based in Beirut, of acts of slandering and intimidation against its Director General, Mr. Ghassan Abdallah.  According to the information received, Mr. Ghassan Abdallah and other PHRO members have been subjected to several acts of intimidation since November 15, 2005. In particular, on November 19, 2005, a public statement was released on the Internet by individuals who presented themselves as PHRO board members and who accused Mr. Abdallah and other PHRO members of “betrayal”, and of “working with international intelligence”, “belonging to networks like FIDH [which] is funded by the CIA and contains racist Israeli groups” , “receiving funding from illegal sources”, etc.  On November 26, 2005, PHRO lodged a complaint before the Civil court in Beirut for slandering. On December 7, 2005, an investigation was opened into these events.  According to the information received, these acts seem to be linked with a meeting between Mr. Abdallah and Mr. Samir Geagea, the leader of the Lebanese Forces (political party), that took place on November 15, 2005, within the framework of the activities of PHRO, which has developed, since more than one year, a program entitled « Truth Leading to Reconciliation » aiming at establishing a Palestinian-Lebanese Dialogue. In this regard, PHRO organised meetings with both Palestinian and Lebanese figures and decision makers in Lebanon, in order to get a better understanding of how the dialogue process is conceived by these various actors, and to determine their views regarding several issues considered by PHRO as necessary components of any future dialogue.  Since this « event », PHRO experienced a whole range of reactions coming, in particular, from political parties. Some of them reportedly decided to conduct their own investigation into the meeting between Mr. Abdallah and Mr. Geagea and into the allegations raised in the press release, and they convoked PHRO representatives to this aim. Some would also have attempted to interfere in the judiciary investigation. Moreover, the Popular Frontiers Liberation Palestine - General Command party (PFLP - GC) asked one of PHRO security staff to convey information to them about PHRO activities and about the movements of its members.  On December 17, 2005, Mr. Abdallah was invited to attend a meeting with the Pro-Syrian Palestinian Alliance Parties, which gathers 7 parties (PFLP-GC, Islamic Struggle Movement - Hamas, Islamic Jihad, Sae’ka, Struggling Frontier (Al-Nidal), Fateh Movement-Intefada and Palestinian Liberation Frontier), in order to discuss his meeting with Geagea and the complaint lodged by PHRO. During this meeting, PHRO representatives did not get the chance to express their opinion and were allegedly insulted and threatened by representatives of Intefada and PFLP-GC.  The Observatory expresses its concern about the situation of Mr. Ghassan Abdallah and PHRO members. The Observatory recalls that PHRO is an independent organisation dedicated to the defence and promotion of the rights of Palestinian refugees in Lebanon. Therefore, the Observatory urges the Lebanese State to comply with the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the General Assembly, which states in particular in its article 12.2 that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”.  Actions requested: Please write to the authorities of Lebanon urging them to:  i.	Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Ghassan Abdallah, and all PHRO members;   ii.	Ensure the fairness, the impartiality and the independence of the inquiry opened into these events;   iii.	Put an end to all acts of slandering and harassment against Mr. Ghassan Abdallah and PHRO members and all human rights defenders in Lebanon and ensure they be able to act and express themselves freely;   iv.	Comply with the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, especially article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, article 6(b), which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others (...) to publish, impart or disseminate to others views, information and knowledge on all human rights and fundamental freedoms”, and above-mentioned article 12.2;   v.	Comply with international human rights standards included in the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other international human rights instruments ratified by the Republic of Lebanon.  Addresses: General Emile Lahoud, President of the Lebanese Republic, Presidential Palace, Beirut, Lebanon, Fax : + 961 1 425 395, Email: opendoor@presidency.gov.lb Mr. Fuad Siniora, Prime Minister, Governmental Palace, Beirut, Lebanon, Fax : + 961 1 869 630, / + 961 1 746 085 Mr. Hassan Sabaa, Home Ministry (Riad El Solh), Beirut, Lebanon, Fax: +96 1 751 622 Mr. Elias Michel Murr, Ministry of National Defence, Beirut, Lebanon, Fax: +96 1 457 920  Mr. Charles Rizk, , Justice Ministry, Beirut, Lebanon, Fax : +961 1 422 957 / : +961 1 427 975  Mr. Gébran Soufan, Ambassador, Permanent mission of the Lebanese Republic to the United Nations in Geneva, rue de Moillebeau 58,  1209 Genève, Switzerland, Fax : + 41 22 791 85 80, Email : mission.lebanon@ties.itu.int  *** Geneva-Paris, December 27, 2005  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.  The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.  The Observatory was the winner of the 1998 Human Rights Prize of the French Republic.  To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:  Email : Appeals@fidh.omct.org Tel et fax FIDH : + 33 1 43 55 20 11 / 33 1 43 55 18 80 Tel et fax OMCT : +41 22 809 49 39 / 41 22 809 49 29 