Philippines:  Rosemarie Trajano: Defending people’s rights is a risky job but someone’s got to do it
December 19, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Philippines / 2016 / DecemberPhilippines: Rosemarie Trajano: Defending people’s rights is a risky job but someone’s got to do it
 
Geneva,
19 December 2016 (OMCT) - Rosemarie Trajano
went from being a community health nurse to working to protect human rights in
the Philippines for the last 30 years. Needless to say it has been a
roller-coaster ride.  “We saw that we could not only cure physical
disease but the social illnesses of the communities,” she said, adding this
lesson instilled in her a desire to assist others. Ms. Trajano has been among those
who have brought about a number of victories in aligning her country’s law with
international standards. Law in the Philippines now includes provisions
upholding international humanitarian law, women’s rights and anti-torture laws,
compensation for victims of martial law. This led her to think the road to a
consistent rule of law would be uphill from there. But she soon realized it
would not be that easy. Newly elected President Duterte’s
authoritarian rule and blatant attacks on human rights now threaten to tear
down the hard-won gains. Since July 2016, after he pledged to wage a “bloody
war” against drugs, the number of extrajudicial killings among alleged drugs
dealers and users has soared to more than 6,100
victims. In only six months, the police
reported killing more than 2,000 “drug personalities”, while vigilantes killed
some 3,841 alleged drug users and dealers.  A
war on drugs and on human rights Even if the country’s human
rights situation had seemed to improve slightly in recent years, such profound
setbacks can only be chilling.  “And then this comes,” she said. “We
thought all the time that we were through with civil and political rights and
that we could focus on economic, social and cultural rights. But the problems
are still there and we have to start again.” Ms. Trajano is realistic when it
comes to gauging success in her line of work, which always has ups and downs. Paradoxically,
the thought of starting over does not deter her from the task ahead – both
for her likeminded peers living in her home country but also globally.  “This is not only a job,” she
said. “In fact we are earning so little… Maybe it is in our blood!”  Profiled,
hacked and threatened Like so many human rights
defenders across the world, Ms. Trajano says she has been profiled by police
forces because of her vocal opposition of the rampant killings and violence in
the context of the war on drugs in her country. She received a warning saying
that she was being monitored and that her social media accounts were being
tracked. As most NGOs, her organization’s website is being monitored - if not
hacked - by the Government.  The Government has now started a
campaign targeting human rights defenders directly. On 28 November, President Duterte
publicly
threatened to kill defenders critical of
his war on drugs. A few days later, President Duterte uttered similar threats
against lawyers of alleged drug dealers. But Ms.
Trajano feels the onus is on her to stand up for her people’s rights. “We cannot stop. We have to
continue,” she said. “Human rights are not given
freely. It’s always a struggle… If no one works, and if no one struggles,
then who will struggle for the people, who will struggle with the people?”  This
article is part of a series of 10 profiles to commemorate International Human
Rights Day, 10 December, and to recognize the vital role of human rights
defenders worldwide. 





To
see the campaign video, please click here.
 
  OMCT wishes to thank the Republic and Canton
of Geneva and the OAK Foundation for their support. Its content is the sole
responsibility of OMCT and should in no way be interpreted as reflecting the
view(s) of the supporting institutions. 