Bangladesh:  Odhikar Secretary and member of OMCT General Assembly Adilur Rahman Khan placed under remand for five days
August 11, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2013 / AugustBangladesh: Odhikar Secretary and member of OMCT General Assembly Adilur Rahman Khan placed under remand for five days 
New information
BGD 001 / 0813 /
OBS 074.1
Arbitrary detention / 
Judicial harassment
Bangladesh
August 11, 2013
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human
Rights (FIDH), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Bangladesh.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed
by reliable sources that Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan,
Secretary of the human rights non-governmental organisation Odhikar, a member
of OMCT General Assembly and Executive Committee Member of Forum Asia[1],
was placed under remand for five days.
 
According
to the information received, on August 11, 2013, Mr. Adilur
Rahman Khan was brought before the Metropolitan Magistrate Court, where Judge Amit
Kumar Dey placed him on a
five-day remand for interrogation in connection with publishing a “false
report” on casualties during a crackdown on a rally by the Islamist
organisation Hefazat-e Islam on May 5-6, 2013 (See background information), after hearing a petition from police seeking a ten-day
remand.
 
The Observatory reiterates
its deepest concern about Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan's arbitrary
detention, which seem to merely aim at sanctioning his peaceful human
rights activities, and calls upon the authorities in
Bangladesh to guarantee in all circumstances his physical and psychological
integrity as well as to release him immediately and unconditionally.
 
Background information:
 
On August 10, 2013, at 10.20 pm, Mr.
Adilur Rahman Khan was arrested by eight or nine men in plain clothes who said
they were of
the Detective Branch of Police (DB) as he was returning at his Gulshan residence in Dhaka[2] with
his family. The men, who brought a white microbus apparently belonging to the United
Commercial Bank and a blue and silver coloured mitsubishi pajero, asked Mr.
Adilur Rahman Khan to follow them. They did not present any
warrant of arrest and did not inform neither his family nor Mr. Rahman
Khan why they were arresting him and where they were taking him. 
 
On August 11, 2013, at 2:00 am, Odhikar
defenders went to the Gulshan police, where the police present denied having
any case against Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan and claimed that they
learnt of his arrest from the media. Odhikar defenders also went to the DB
office at
12:30 am on August 11, where the sentries denied them entry.
 
The Dhaka Metropolitan Police subsequently confirmed the arrest to the
media, adding that Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan has been
arrested under the Information and Communication Technology Act. The arrest was
allegedly made on the basis of a general diary filed by the
police with Gulshan police station, in relation to the fact-finding report
issued by Odhikar about the killing of 61
people during an operation carried out on May 5-6, 2013 by law enforcement
agencies against Hifazat-e Islam activists at
the Dhaka’s downtown Motijheel area. 
 
After Odhikar released on June 10, 2013 its fact-finding report on the
human rights
violations perpetrated at the Hefazot rally in Motijheel on May 5-6, 2013, the
Information Ministry sent a letter to Odhikar on July 10, 2013 asking
for the names, family
names and addresses of the 61 deceased people. In its reply letter sent to the
Information Ministry on July 17, 2013, and concerned for the security of
victims' families, Odhikar requested those concerned to form an
independent impartial commission headed by a retired judge, where Odhikar is
willing to submit the names of the 61 victims killed.
 
Action requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Bangladesh, urging them
to:
 
i. Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and
psychological integrity of Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan and of all human rights defenders in Bangladesh;
 
ii. Release Mr. Adilur Rahman
Khan immediately and unconditionally as his detention is arbitrary since
it only aims at sanctioning his human rights activities; 
 
iii. Put an end to any kind of harassment - including at the
judicial level - against Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan and all human rights
defenders in Bangladesh;
 
iv. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations
on December 9, 1998, especially:
-       
its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right,
individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the
protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the
national and international levels”, as well as
-       
its Article 12.2, which provides that the State shall “take
all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence,
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise
of his or her rights”; 

v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards
and international instruments ratified by Bangladesh.
 
Addresses:
 

Ms. Sheikh Hasina,
     Prime Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, Gona Bhaban, Old Sangsad
     Bhaban, Tejgaon, Dhaka, Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 8113243, Email: info@pmo.gov.bd
Mr. Muhiuddin Khan
     Alamgir, Minister for Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Bangladesh
     Secretariat Building 4, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Email: mkalamgir@yahoo.com; minister@mha.gov.bd;
Barrister Shafique
     Ahmed, Minister for Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Ministry of
     Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka,
     Bangladesh, Email: info@minlaw.gov.bd
Mr. Hasanul Haq Inu, Honourable Minister, Ministry of
     Information, Building # 4 (8th floor), Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka-1000,
     Bangladesh. E-mail: minister@moi.gov.bd
Mr. Hasan Mahmud
     Khandaker, Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, Phoenix Road,
     Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh, Email : ig@police.gov.bd

H.E. Mr. Abdul
     Hannan, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of
     Bangladesh to the United Nations in Geneva, 65 rue de Lausanne, 1202
     Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 46 16, E-mail: mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.int
Embassy of the
     People’s Republic of Bangladesh in Brussels, 29-31 rue J. Jordaens, 1000
     Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 646 59 98; Email: bdootbrussels@skynet.be


Please also write to the
diplomatic missions or embassies of Bangladesh in your respective country as well as to the EU diplomatic missions or
embassies in Bangladesh.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, August 11, 2013
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code
of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to
the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete
support in their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:

E-mail:
     Appeals@fidh-omct.org

·       
Tel and
fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
·       
Tel and
fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80




[1] Mr.
Adilur Rahman Khan has also been the Deputy Attorney General during the erstwhile
four-party alliance government.


[2] The
Odhikar office and Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan's home
are situated in the same building. 