Israel:  Knesset approves controversial law targeting foreign-government funding for NGOs
July 18, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2016 / JulyIsrael: Knesset approves controversial law targeting foreign-government funding for NGOs

Paris-Geneva, July 18,
2016 - On July 11, 2016, the Knesset approved its so-called “NGO
Transparency Law”. This law requires NGOs registered in Israel that receive 50%
or more of their funding from foreign government entities to report to the NGO
registrar and to mention such funding in all their official letters and
publications. The fine for violating the law would be up to NIS 29,000 (almost
EUR 6,800).
 
As adopted, the law would in effect
discriminatingly target non-governmental organisations (NGOs) critical of
government policy and in particular human rights NGOs, which receive a majority
of their funding from foreign governments. 25 of the 27 organisations to which the Justice Ministry said the law
would apply are human rights NGOs. By specifically applying to donations from
foreign governments, the NGO Transparency Law de facto exempts right-wing
organisations that receive most of their funding from private (local and
international) sources from the obligation of reporting and publicity.  
 
The Observatory fears
that the legislation that was passed seeks to undermine and de-legitimize the
work of prominent human rights organisations in Israel, which monitor, among
other issues, human rights violations against Palestinians. 
 
“This
NGO Transparency Law clearly targets peaceful dissent groups and seeks to
restrict the legitimate activities of civil society and human rights defenders in
Israel. The law violates international human rights standards of freedom of
association enshrined in the International Covenant for Civil and Political
Rights, ratified by Israel”, said FIDH President Karim Lahidji. 
 
The legislative move comes amid increased
repression of Israeli and Palestinian organisations that denounce the
detrimental human rights impact of the occupation of the Palestinian Territory.
In particular, the NGO Transparency Law came after unprecedented smear
campaigns by right-wing groups and branding Israeli human rights defenders as “foreign agents” and “traitors”.
 
“Israeli society used to be proud
that it provides the space to act for human rights organisations as a natural
part of being a democratic State. Sadly, the statements by Justice Minister
Ayelet Shaked show that human rights work is now seen as a foreign interest”,
said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock. “This is not about transparency or
financing. This is about human rights work because it displeases. Nowhere is
this more evident than in the differential treatment of pro-settlement groups
and human rights work”.
 
Several groups, including
the EU Commission and representatives of foreign States, have criticised the
NGO Transparency Law, emphasizing that it contributes to a climate in which
human rights organisations are increasingly de-legitimised. UN Special
Rapporteurs on the Promotion and Protection of the Right to Freedom of Opinion
and Expression, the Rights to Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and of association,
and on the Situation of Human Rights Defenders stated on June 24, 2016 that the proposed law, “has the evident
intent of targeting human rights and civil rights organizations, which receive
a majority of their funding from foreign government entities,
while leaving unaffected other organizations that nonetheless receive a
substantial amount of foreign funding from individuals”.
 
Under the pretext of increasing transparency, the NGO Transparency Law
seeks to hamper the activities of organisations critical of the government’s
policies. By complicating the space in which civil society organisations
operate, the new law seeks to impose restrictions on freedoms of expression and
association in Israel. 
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme
is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against
human rights defenders.
 
For more information, please contact:
·      
FIDH: Audrey Couprie: + 33 1 43 55 25 18·      
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau /
Chiara Cosentino: +41 22 809 49 39 