Mexico:  WHRDIC: Stop defamation against the WHRDs of CEDEHM in Mexico
April  1, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Mexico / 2015 / AprilMexico: WHRDIC: Stop defamation against the WHRDs of CEDEHM in MexicoThe
 Women Human Rights Defenders International Coalition (WHRDIC), of which
 OMCT is a member, is a resource and advocacy network supporting
women human rights defenders worldwide. THE Women Human Rights Defender International Coalition (WHRDIC) has 
serious concerns about the situation of women human rights defenders 
(WHRDs) Luz Estela Castro, Director of the Women’s Human Rights Center 
(CEDEHM) and Irma Villanueva, Director of the Legal Department of CEDEHM
 in Chihuahua, Mexico.
The WHRDIC is aware of a campaign discrediting the work of Ms Castro 
and Ms Villanueva which has involved defamatory articles in print media,
 as well as derogatory references to their work defending and promoting 
human rights. Ms Castro and Ms Villanueva have a national and 
international reputation for their defense of human rights. The 
defamation campaign is not only damaging to their reputations and the 
validity of their work, but also makes them extremely vulnerable to high
 levels of risk.
According to the information received, the timing of the campaign and
 harassment corresponds to cases where Ms Castro and Ms Villanueva 
accompany and support women who are victims of institutional violence by
 governmental bodies such as the Justice Department, the National System
 for Family Development, and the Specialized Gender-Based Violence Crime
 Units in Chihuahua.
The WHRDIC is particularly alarmed that attacks against CEDEHM 
members have occurred despite of CEDEHM’s precautionary measures ordered
 by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) in 2008 and in
 spite of Luz Estela Castro’s (Director of CEDEHM) provisional measures 
from the Inter-American Court of Human Rights since 2013.
In addition, the WHRDIC is disturbed about the claims made by Enrique
 Serrano Escobar, the Mayor of Ciudad Juarez, who, on February 19, 2015,
 stated, that femicide is a myth (leyenda negra) in front of the Senate 
that in Ciudad Juarez in order to give CEDEHM members a bad reputation 
during a forum about repatriation.
With these kinds of statements, the Mayor is hiding the 20-year 
reality of violence and risk for women in the State of Chihuahua, which 
has been documented by diverse civil society and human rights 
organisations, including CEDEHM. Such statements also contribute to the 
stigmatisation of WHRDs that fight for the end of violence against women
 while fostering a climate of defamation and discrediting of pro-women’s
 human rights work.
It is critical to draw attention to and recognise the contribution of
 WHRDs as they strengthen societies, institutions and democratic 
processes, as referred to by the United Nation’s Declaration on the 
Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to
 Promote and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental
 Freedoms, which dictates that governments and authorities should 
not be obstacles to such processes but instead represent an important 
and legitimate force in democratic states.
The WHRDIC demands:
that the precautionary and provisional measures in favor of WHRDs 
Luz Estela Castro and Irma Villanueva as well as the other members of 
CEDEHM are immediately implemented.the efficient coordination between the State and Federal Governments
 in order to effectively implement the protective measures granted by 
international bodies.
Implementation of a holistic policy in favor of WHRDs in Chihuahua 
in accordance with international standards including the Inter-American 
Court of Human Rights case Luna vs. Honduras.
an end to the stigmatization and attacks against WHRDs and the women’s human rights movement in the State of Chihuahua. 