China:  Sentencing of Beijing-based housing rights activist and legal advocate, Ms. Ni Yulan and her husband Mr. Dong Jiqin_Fear for their safety
April 13, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / China / 2012 / AprilChina: Sentencing of Beijing-based housing rights activist and legal advocate, Ms. Ni Yulan and her husband Mr. Dong Jiqin_Fear for their safetyCase CHN 030611.1
Follow-up of case CHN 030611
Sentencing/ Arbitrary detention/ Alleged torture and
ill-treatment/ Fear for the safety
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) has received new information and requests your URGENT
intervention in the following situation inthe People’s Republic of China.
New
information 
TheInternational Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable
source and Antenna International, a member organisation of OMCT SOS-Torture Network,
about the sentencing of Beijing-based housing rights activist and legal
advocate, Ms. Ni Yulan and her
husband Mr. Dong Jiqin. 
According to the information
received, on 10 April 2012, Ms. Ni Yulan was
convicted of “creating a disturbance” and “fraud” and sentenced to two years
and eight months in prison by Xicheng District People’s Court in Beijing,
following a ten minutes hearing. Her husband, Mr. Dong Jiqin, was sentenced to
two years in prison for “creating a disturbance”. 
Ms. Ni Yulan and Mr. Dong Jiqin were taken into custody on 7 April 2011, during the crackdown against
civil society launched by the Chinese authorities following anonymous online
calls for a “Jasmine Revolution”[1]
early 2011, and tried on 29 December 2011. They were reportedly accused of
having torn up a registration book and insulted the staff at a hotel, where
they were staying early 2011. Ms. Ni Yulan was additionally charged with
“fraud” for misrepresenting herself as a lawyer in order to gain financially. 
Ms. Ni Yulan and Mr. Dong
Jiqin are detained in Xicheng District Detention Centre in Beijing. OMCT remains
gravely concerned for their physical and psychological integrity, in particular
given Ms. Ni Yulan’s health condition. As the result
of repeated torture over the past decade, Ms. Ni Yulan cannot walk and suffers
from several chronic medical issues.
OMCT recalls that the Beijing police
had previously detained Ms. Ni Yulan on two occasions for an extended period of
time. On 27 September 2002, she
was arrested when petitioning the Beijing National People's Congress Standing
Committee about police beating that she had endured on 27 April 2002 when
filming the forced demolition of a Beijing home.
The beating left her unable to walk without crutches. She was convicted of
"obstructing official business" and sentenced to one year in prison.
Furthermore, in 2008, Ms. Ni Yulan was accused of having beaten a member of the
demolition crew who knocked down a wall of her home, on 15 April 2008. She
was again convicted of "obstructing official business" and, during
her period of detention, from 2008-2010, she was, among others, allegedly
verbally insulted, beaten, held with people with infectious diseases, denied
medical treatment, subjected to forced labour and placed in solitary confinement[2].

OMCT recalls to
the competent Chinese authorities that China is legally bound to effectively
ensure the physical and psychological integrity of all persons deprived of
liberty in accordance with international human rights law, and in particular,
the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment. In line with their obligations under this treaty, it is also incumbent
on the Chinese authorities to consider seriously any allegations of torture and
ill-treatment, and to undertake a thorough and impartial investigation in this
regard. 
OMCT believes that
the detention and sentencing of Ms. Ni Yulan and Mr. Dong Jiqin merely aim at
intimidating them and impeding them from carrying out their peaceful activities
in the defence of human rights and to exercise their rights to freedom of
expression. 
Brief description of the situation
OMCT had earlier been informed
about the arbitrary detention of Ms. Ni Yulan, and her husband Mr. Dong Jiqin, as well as of Wuhan-based political activist,
Mr. Li Tie. OMCT was gravely
concerned about their safety. OMCT had also
been informed about the arbitrary detention and subsequent release of
Mr. Wei Quiang,originally
from Yan'an City, and Mr. Li Tie’s lawyer, Mr. Jin Guanghong, who were both allegedly tortured and ill-treated in detention[3]. 
Actions Requested
Please
write to the authorities in the People’s Republic of China
urging them to:
i.                    
Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and
psychological integrity of Ms. Ni Yulan, and Mr. Dong Jiqin; 
ii.                  
Guarantee Ms. Ni Yulan and Mr. Dong Jiqin full access to their lawyers,
their family
as well as guarantee that they are examined by
independent doctors and receive adequate medical care, in accordance, inter alia, with the recommendations of
the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners; 
iii.                 
Order Ms. Ni Yulan and Mr. Dong
Jiqin immediate release as their detention is
arbitrary as it only aims at sanctioning their peaceful activities; 
iv.                
Put an end to any kind of
harassment – including at the judicial level – against Ms. Ni Yulan and Mr. Dong Jiqin; 
v.                  
Ensure that adequate,
effective and prompt reparation, including adequate compensation and
rehabilitation, is granted to the victims concerned;
vi.                
Guarantee the respect of human rights and the
fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws
and international human rights standards.
Addresses
·  
   Mr. Wen Jiabao, Prime Minister of the
People’s Republic of China, Guojia Zongli, The State Council General Office, 2
Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 65961109 (c/o Ministry of Foreign Affairs)
·      Mr. Wu
Aiying, Minister of Justice of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang Sifabu,
10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People’s Republic of
China, Fax: +86 10 6529 2345, minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cn
·      Mr. Yang
Jiechi, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang
Waijiaobu, 2 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Beijingshi 100701, People’s Republic of
China, Fax: +86 10 6588 2594, Email: ipc@fmprc.gov.cn;
·  
   Mr. Meng
Jianzhu, Minister of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China,
Buzhang, Gong’anbu, 14 Dongchang’anjie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100741,
People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 63099216
·  
   Mr. Fu Zhenghua, Director of the Beijing
Public Security Bureau, Juzhang, Beijingshi Gong’anju, 9 Qianmen Dongdajie,
Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100740, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10
85222320, Email: wbjc2sohu.com

Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of
China, Ch. De
Surville, CP 85, 1213 Petit-Lancy 2, Suisse, e-mail:
mission.china@ties.itu.int, Fax : +41 22 793 70 14

Please also write to the
embassies of the People’s Republic of China in your respective
country.
Geneva, 13 April 2012.
***
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.



[1] The 2011
Chinese “Jasmine Revolution” protests refer to weekly
pro-democracy street actions in over a dozen cities in China starting on 20
February 2011.
An anonymous call for protest was initially published on line on 19
February 2011,
particularly on Twitter, suggesting specific places in 12 to 13 cities, where
people should gather. 


[2] See OMCT urgent appeal CHN 310708 and CHN 310708.1


[3] For further details, please see
OMCT urgent appeal CHN 030611. 