India:  Ongoing judicial harassment of human rights defenders Ms. Teesta Setalvad and her husband, Mr. Javed Anand
February  8, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / India / 2017 / FebruaryIndia: Ongoing judicial harassment of human rights defenders Ms. Teesta Setalvad and her husband, Mr. Javed Anand
New information
IND 003 / 0716 / OBS
054.1
Judicial harassment
India
February 8, 2017

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
India.
 
New information: 

The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources of the ongoing judicial
harassment of human rights defenders Ms.
Teesta Setalvad and her husband, Mr. Javed
Anand. Ms. Setalvad is the founder of Sabrang Trust, a non-governmental organisation that works to promote conflict
resolution and support peace building, as well as of Citizens for Justice and
Peace (CJP). Within the framework of CJP, Ms. Setalvad has notably been
at the forefront of protests and legal interventions on behalf of victims and
their families regarding crimes committed against Muslims during the Gujarat
riots of 2002, and has been sharply critical of the then Gujarat State
government led by Mr. Narendra Modi, now Prime Minister of India.
 
According
to the information received, on February 3, 2017, Ms. Teesta
Setalvad and Mr. Javed Anand appeared before the Mumbai Special Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) Magistrate Court, related to
charges they are facing for alleged violations of
Section 120 B of the Indian Penal Code (criminal conspiracy) and the Foreign Contribution (Regulations) Act (FCRA). The CBI decided to
grant them bail on the surety of Rs 20,000 (about 280 EUR), but they
cannot leave the country without court’s permission. The next hearing in
this case is scheduled for May 12, 2017.
 
Ms.
Teesta Setalvad and Mr. Javed Anand had been
summoned by the court after the CBI filed a charge sheet on January 3, 2017
against them and their publishing company, Sabrang Communications and
Publishing Private Limited (SCPPL), for alleged criminal
conspiracy and alleged violations of the
FCRA, in relation to funding received from the US-based Ford Foundation without
the prior approval of the Ministry of Home Affairs. Yet, according to Ms.
Teesta Setalvad, the publishing house had a consultancy contract with the Ford
Foundation, which excluded it from the restrictions of the FCRA.
 
The Observatory expresses its deepest
concern about the ongoing judicial harassment against Ms.
Teesta Setalvad and Mr. Javed Anand, which seems to be merely aimed at sanctioning their human rights
activities, in particular their work for justice and truth with regard to the 2002 Gujarat
riots (see background information). 
 
The
Observatory also urges the Indian authorities to ensure that all judicial
proceedings against Ms. Teesta Setalvad and Mr.
Javed Anand are conducted in full compliance with their right to
a fair trial, as provided for under international law.
 
Background information:
 
Judicial proceedings have been ongoing
against Ms. Teesta Setalvad and her spouse since 2013, based on spurious
charges of alleged embezzlement of funds intended for the construction of a
memorial to the victims of the 2002 Gujarat riots. Ms. Teesta Setalvad had to
seek anticipatory bail from the Supreme Court in relation to this case. An investigation
that began in January 2014 has resulted in continuous harassment and systematic
probes into the accounts of Sabrang Trust and groundless accusations of
non-cooperation. On July 14, 2015, Ms. Teesta Setalvad's house and office were
raided by officers of the Central Bureau of Investigation and on June 29, 2015,
a travel ban was imposed on her. 
 
On February 12, 2015, the Gujarat High Court denied anticipatory bail to
Ms. Teesta Setalvad and her husband, Mr. Javeed Anand. 40 minutes later,
Gujarat police arrived at their residence in Mumbai. However, on the same day
the Supreme Court issued a stay on the High Court order, which prevented the
couple from being arrested.
 
On March 10, 2015, the Government of Gujarat’s Home Department wrote to
the Ministry of Home Affairs, ordering the Ministry to carry out an inspection
of Sabrang Trust upon allegation of FCRA violations.
 
From April 9 to 11, 2015, a
four-member FCRA Inspection Team headed by Shri Mahendra Kumar, Deputy
Secretary (MHA/GOI), inspected the accounts and related records of Sabrang
Trust in Mumbai. All original documents and photocopies as required by the
Inspection Team were submitted, along with printouts of books of accounts of
Sabrang Trust’s FCRA account and the Inspection Team acknowledged receipt of
all these documents.
 
Sabrang Trust subsequently
received an official post-inspection communication from the FCRA department.
The notice, signed by Under Secretary Shri Anand Joshi, who was not part of the
Inspection Team, and dated June 4, 2015, made several ”observations” concerning
alleged violations of the FCRA, 2010 and the FCR Rules, 2011.
 
Through a detailed letter
dated June 25, 2015, Sabrang Trust responded to each allegation,
point-by-point, highlighting how, contrary to what was claimed in the
“observations”, the Trust had not violated any provision of the FCR Act and
Rules.
 
Sabrang Trust received an
'Order' dated September 9, 2015, signed by Deputy Secretary Shri Mahendra Kumar
(who had headed the Inspection Team in April 2015), suspending the FCRA
registration of Sabrang Trust for a period of 180 days.
 
In response, through a
detailed letter dated October 5, 2015, addressed to the Deputy Secretary,
Sabrang Trust challenged again the 'Order', denying once again having committed
any FCRA violation. The Trust requested that it be given an opportunity for its
members to present the case in person before the FCRA authorities.
 
Subsequently, Sabrang Trust
received a letter dated March 30, 2016 signed by Shri D.P. Tripathy, Director of
FCRA Monitoring Unit, asking Mr. Javeed Anand, Sabrang Trust's Chief
Functionary, to appear before him on April 16, 2016 to present Sabrang Trust's
case. Accordingly, Mr. Javeed Anand and a lawyer appeared before the Director
of FCRA Monitoring Unit to further support Sabrang Trust's contention that it
had not violated any provision of the FCR Act and Rules. The meeting lasted
less than 10 minutes.
 
On June 16, 2016, the Ministry of Home Affairs announced on its website
that the licence of Sabrang Trust had been cancelled under FCRA with “immediate effect”. 
 
Actions requested: 
 
Please write to the authorities in India,
urging them to:
 
i. Put an end to all acts of
harassment - including at the judicial level - against Ms. Teesta Setalvad and
Mr. Javeed
Anand, as well as
against all human rights defenders and organisations in India so that they are
able to carry out their work without hindrances;
 
ii. Review the FCRA and amend the law and
related implementing policies to ensure that they are in conformity to
international law and human rights standards;
 
iii. Conform with the provisions of the UN
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the
United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially its Articles 1 and 12.2; and
 
iv. More generally, ensure in all
circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with
international and regional human rights instruments ratified by India.

Addresses: 
 
·        
Mr. Shri Nanredra Damodardas Modi, Prime Minister of India, Fax: + 91 11
2301 6857. E-mail: pmosb@pmo.nic.in / manmo@sansad.in
·        
Mr. Raj Nath Singh, Union Minister of Home Affairs of India, Fax: +91 11
2309 2979. Email: dirfcra-mha@gov.in
·        
Sh. B. K. Singh, Under
Secretary (FCRA), Ministry of Home Affairs, Email: usfcra-mha@gov.in

·        
Justice T.S. Thakur,, Chief Justice of India, Supreme
Court, of India, Fax: +91 11 233 83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.in
·        
Justice Shri H.L. Dattu, Chairperson of the National Human Rights
Commission of India, Fax +91 11 2465 1329. Email: covdnhrc@nic.in; ionhrc@nic.in
·        
Mr. Srinivasa Kammath, Focal Point on Human Rights Defenders, National Human Rights
Commission, of India, Email: hrd-nhrc@nic.in
·        
H.E. Mr. Ajit Kumar, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of India to the
United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 906 86 96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
·        
Embassy of India in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2
6489638 / +32 2 6451869
 
Please also write to the diplomatic
mission or embassy of India in your respective country.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, February 8, 2017
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this
programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
• E-mail: Appeals[at]fidh.omct.org 
• Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41
22 809 49 29
• Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33
1 43 55 18 80
​ 