European Union (EU):  HRDN reaction to the Council Conclusions on the action plan on human rights and democracy 2015 - 2019 - From words to action: Time for EU leadership to walk the talk on Human Rights and Democracy
July 30, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / European Union (EU) / 2015 / JulyEuropean Union (EU): HRDN reaction to the Council Conclusions on the action plan on human rights and democracy 2015 - 2019 - From words to action: Time for EU leadership to walk the talk on Human Rights and Democracy2015.07.30 HRDN Reaction HRAP_English2 pages / 177 KBStatement of the Human Rights and Democracy Network (HRDN),
of which the OMCT is a member organisation following the adoption of the recent Council Conclusions and revised Human Rights
and Democracy Action Plan by the European Council                                                                                                                        30
July 2015The adoption of the recent Council Conclusions and revised Human Rights
and Democracy Action Plan is a timely reaffirmation of the European Union’s (EU)
commitment to pursuing a comprehensive human rights and democracy support agenda.
Human rights and democracy are under threat globally and it is time for
the EU to act on its commitments to protect, promote and fulfil human rights
and fundamental freedoms. We reiterate our
call for the EU and its member states to be at the forefront of the
international community in acting and speaking out against human rights violations
whenever and wherever they occur.
HRDN welcomes the wide range of human rights issues and measures in
support of democracy that the Action Plan covers but there is a need for
concrete action and a clear division of roles and responsibilities so that the
EU can manage to work effectively on the full scope of issues it confronts
globally. Furthermore, to achieve impact, EU actions need to be backed by
political will and ambition to deliver on this human rights agenda at the
highest level within the EU institutions, coupled with greater buy-in from all
EU member states. This Action Plan will only be a success if it is applied equally
to the current crackdowns in places like Azerbaijan, Bahrain, China, Egypt,
Myanmar, and Burundi and to tackle the shrinking civil society space and deepening repression
in places like Ethiopia, Russia, Saudi Arabia and
Uzbekistan.
We note that the Action Plan is a set of thematic priorities, rather
than the sum total of the EU’s human rights and democracy agenda. It is one of
a wider range of policies and instruments on human rights and democracy which
the EU and its member states have committed to put into practice. The HRDN
would like to see greater transparency and accountability in how human rights
commitments are implemented by EU member states and institutions. HRDN
reiterates the European Parliament’s call for a public annual Foreign Affairs
Council (FAC) debate on human rights. HRDN further calls for member states to
step up to lead parts of the Action Plan to ensure greater burden-sharing,
ownership and coherence, including at the country level. 
We recall that human rights were to be the silver thread running through
EU policies and actions. Progress has been slow in achieving this goal, and human
rights should therefore be integrated into geographic strategies, just as they
must be fully supported in trade, migration, security, energy and other
policies to achieve policy coherence. It will be critical to the success of the
EU’s human rights and democracy policy for all EU institutions to ensure
adequate resources, requisite expertise and clear prioritisation are accorded
to support people in realising their human rights and democratic freedoms.
Human rights and democracy should have a prominent role in the structure and
decision-making of the European External Action Service (EEAS), in Brussels and
delegations, in line with the Lisbon Treaty. 
We recall that
the EU commits in its Strategic Framework to throwing its “full
weight behind advocates of liberty, democracy, and human rights throughout the
world”, for human rights, democracy, the rule of law and international justice
to be promoted “in all areas of the EU's external actions without exception”
and for the EU to “place human rights at the centre of its relations with
all third countries including strategic partners”. The Strategic Framework and
Action Plan should represent a transition to a more transparent and accountable
EU human rights policy – including public diplomacy, so that the EU is a stronger
voice for human rights and a more vocal supporter of human rights defenders. 
In recent years, this voice has been faltering. The EU has often
preferred silent diplomacy and has lacked a strategic approach to addressing
human rights violations. Now is the time for the EU to demonstrate that
strategic political ambition by using the many tools at its disposal to bring
about real change in the realisation of people’s rights and freedoms.
We call on the EU and its member states now
to walk the talk in implementing their commitments. HRDN stands ready to work with the EU and its
member states at all levels to ensure that the EU Strategic Framework and
Action Plan results in concrete, coherent and results-oriented actions across
the world.
For further information
contact: HRDN Troika troika@hrdn.euThe Human Rights and Democracy Network (HRDN),
of which the OMCT is a member organisation, is an informal grouping of NGOs operating at EU level in the broader areas of
human rights, democracy and conflict prevention. Participation in the network
is open to non-governmental organizations which engage at EU level in the
promotion of human rights, democracy and conflict prevention in and outside the
EU.The vision of the HRDN is that human rights and democracy are
placed at the heart of the EU's internal and external policy agenda. This
vision should manifest itself in a EU that effectively protects human rights at
home and is a force for positive change in the world. In pursuit of this
vision, the network aims to influence EU and member state human rights policies
and the programming of their funding instruments to promote democracy, human
rights and sustainable peace. 