Benin:  OMCT Mission to Monitor and Promote the Rights of Children in Conflict with the Law
November  6, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Statements / Benin / 2013 / NovemberBenin: OMCT Mission to Monitor and Promote the Rights of Children in Conflict with the Law
Geneva-Cotonou, September 2013. The World Organization Against Torture
(OMCT) and its local partner in Benin, Solidarity for Children in Africa and
the World (ESAM), organized a mission from 9 to 13 September 2013, to monitor
the conditions of children in conflict with the law and promote a training to
Juvenile Court Judges. 
The mission also counted with the presence of the international expert
Mr. Fortuné
Gaetan Zongo, member of the UN Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment (SPT), and judge at the Appeal Court of Burkina-Faso.
During the mission OMCT expressed its concern regarding the continuing
allegations of violence against children deprived of liberty, to authorities of
the Ministry of Justice and of the Ministry of Family. 
In addition, three prisons were visited (Cotonou, Oidah and Lokossa)
were children detained were interviewed and local authorities questioned about
the treatment and allegations of practices that could amount to Torture and
Ill-treatment.
According to the information provided by the children, OMCT notices with
concern that corporal punishment and solitary confinement are commonly used in
the centres visited. Children also have claimed to have constant contact with
adults prisoners, and that the food is insufficient and of bad quality.
OMCT is especially concerned about the situations of girls deprived of
liberty, who don’t have access to any educational activity and are placed in
the same space with adult women.
As a conclusion of the mission OMCT, its local partner and Mr. Zongo
conducted a two-day training on the International Human Rights Standards for
the Protection of Children and the Prevention and Fight against Torture. The
training counted with the presence of all Juvenile Court Judges in the country,
and was perceived as an opportunity to dialogue with the judges and seek
practical solutions to prevent torture and ill-treatment of children deprived
of liberty in Benin. 
OMCT and ESAM continue to monitor the situation in the country through
regular visits to detention centres and a continuum dialogue with the
Government.
OMCT recalls that States have a positive obligation to protect children
from all forms of violence.  Children
deprived of their liberty are especially vulnerable and must be object of
special measures from the State to prevent situations of risk, and safeguard
their life and physical integrity. 