China:  Concerning health condition and ongoing arbitrary detention of Guo Feixiong
July 13, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / China / 2016 / JulyChina: Concerning health condition and ongoing arbitrary detention of Guo Feixiong

CHN 002 / 0716 / OBS 060
Torture
/ Arbitrary detention / Ill-treatment
People’s Republic of China
July
13, 2016
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests
your urgent intervention on the following situation in the People’s Republic of China (PRC).
 
Brief description of the
situation: 

 
The Observatory has been informed by
Human Rights in China (HRIC) about the very concerning health condition,
allegations of torture and ill-treatment and ongoing arbitrary detention of
prominent human rights defender Mr. Yang Maodong, more commonly known by
his pen-name Guo Feixiong.
 
According to the information received, Guo Feixiong is feared to be in critical health
condition after more than 60 days on hunger strike in protest against his
arbitrary detention and ill-treatment in Yangchun Prison, Guangdong Province.
According to the director of the prison hospital at Yangchun, Guo Feixiong
has been force-fed twice every other day since May 14, 2016 and is being given
intravenous supplements every other day against his will. Previous reports of
force feeding in prisons in China have indicated that prisoners are tied to a
bed while tubes are forcibly inserted into their nose, resulting in injuries to
their nose, mouth, and stomach and subsequent bleeding, which could be fatal
considering Guo
Feixiong’s already fragile health condition.
 
No one has been allowed to see or speak with Guo Feixiong for almost a
month, and it is feared that his health is in a critical condition. The last
visit he was granted was by his lawyers Zhang Lei and Li Jinxing on June 20,
2016, who were allowed to meet with him for only 30 minutes[1].
They noted that Guo
Feixiong was very frail, and was unable to walk
properly or speak coherently.
 
While
in detention, Guo Feixiong has been subject to multiple degrading acts and
ill-treatment. Most recently, on May 9, 2016, prison
officials video-recorded Guo Feixiong undergoing a humiliating medical
examination against his will, and threatened to upload the video online. This
prompted Guo Feixiong to declare a hunger strike the same day to protest against the
continuous harassment and ill-treatment he has suffered while in detention. His
weight subsequently dropped from 75 kg to 52 kg the last time he was seen in
June 2016. Guo Feixiong had also informed his
family in June that he was suffering from internal bleeding and continued
bleeding in his mouth and throat that had begun when he was first transferred
to Yangchun Prison in 2015, but was still being denied access to proper medical
treatment. In view of this, Guo Feixiong’s family requested that he be
transferred to a facility where he can receive medical treatment, but the
authorities reportedly responded that he would only be moved to a hospital “in
the event that he loses consciousness”. 
 
On June 11, 2016, Guo Feixiong’s sister attempted to visit him,
but prison officials refused the visit and only allowed her to exchange written
notes with him. In these notes, Guo wrote that he would not stop his hunger
strike because his demands had not been met and the prison authorities were
continuing to subject him to humiliation and ill-treatment, and that he wished
to request a transfer from Yangchun Prison on the 100th day of his hunger
strike. On the same day, his sister was also informed by prison officials that
she could only visit her brother once a month. She therefore went to Yangshun
Prison on July 12, 2016 but was again denied the right to visit with her
brother. Prison officials told her that Guo had decided that she could only
visit him on July 28, and not before.
 
Guo
Feixiong was arrested on August 8, 2013 on charges of “assembling a crowd to
disrupt order in a public place” after he was spotted at a public protest in
January 2013, in support of a Guangzhou newspaper that was battling government
censorship at the time. Guo Feixiong was subsequently placed in police custody,
and was denied access to legal counsel until November 14, 2013, after eight
failed attempts made by lawyers to visit him.
 
On June 24, 2014, after ten months in police custody, Guo Feixiong
was formally charged with “gathering crowds to
disrupt public order”. Because they had been denied access to Guo’s case file,
his lawyers boycotted his initial hearing scheduled for September 12, 2014,
which resulted in a postponement. On November 27, 2015, Guo Feixiong was finally sentenced to six years in prison by the Tianhe
District People’s Court in Guangzhou on
charges of “gathering crowds to disrupt social order” and “picking quarrels and
provoking trouble”. The latter charge was added by the judge at the time of
sentencing.
 
The Observatory is deeply concerned regarding the allegations of torture
and ill-treatment against Guo Feixiong in detention, as well as his current
health condition, and calls on the authorities to provide him immediately with
appropriate medical treatment and to fully investigate the allegations of
mistreatment by the prison authorities.
 
Besides, the Observatory strongly condemns the continued arbitrary
detention of Guo Feixiong, which seem aimed at punishing him for his legitimate
human rights work, and Observatory calls on the Chinese authorities to
immediately and unconditionally release him.
 
Background information:
 
Guo
Feixiong has continuously been subjected to extreme judicial harassment and
arbitrary detention since 2005[2].
In November 2007 he was sentenced to five years in prison and fined RMB 40,000
for “illegal business activity” in connection with his 2001 publication of a
book about a political scandal in Shenyang, Liaoning Province. Guo was released
in September 2011, but has since been subjected to heavy surveillance and
regular questioning about his activities, until he was re-arrested in August
2013[3].
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in the People’s Republic of China,
urging them to:
 
i.              
Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Guo Feixiong, as well
as of his family and of all human rights defenders in China;
 
ii.             
Provide immediately Guo
Feixiong with appropriate medical treatment;
 
iii.           
Release Guo Feixiong
immediately and unconditionally since his detention is arbitrary;
 
iv.            
Carry out an immediate, thorough,
impartial and transparent investigation into the allegations of torture and
ill-treatment against Guo Feixiong, in order to identify all those responsible,
bring them before an independent tribunal, and sanction them as provided by the
law;
 
v.             
Put an end to the
harassment - including at the judicial level - against Guo Feixiong, as well as
against all human rights defenders in China;
 
vi.            
Conform with the
provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted
by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, especially its Articles 1 and
12.2;
 
vii.          
Ensure in all
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with international human rights standards and international instruments
ratified by the People’s Republic of China.
 
Addresses: 
 
Mr. Li
     Keqiang, Prime Minister of the People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10
     65961109 (c/o Ministry of Foreign Affairs)Ms. WU
     Aiying, Minister of Justice of the People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10
     6529 2345, Email: minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cnMr. Wang Yi,
     Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10
     6588 2594, Email: ipc@fmprc.gov.cnMr. Guo
     Shengkun, Minister of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China,
     Fax: +86 10 63099216 H.E. Mr. Wu Hailong, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China to the UN in
     Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7937014, E-mail: chinamission_gva@mfa.gov.cnEmbassy of the People’s Republic of China in Brussels, Belgium,
     Fax: +32-2-7792895; Email: chinaemb_be@mfa.gov.cn
 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the People’s
Republic of China in your respective country.



[1] The previous time his lawyers visited him, which was
in May 2016, they were only allowed to meet with him for two minutes.


[2]
For more details, see, amongst others, Observatory Urgent Appeal CHN 001 / 0206
/ OBS 018.4 of November 5, 2008.


[3]
For more information on Guo Feixiong's case, see http://www.hrichina.org/en/citizens-square/case-guo-feixiong-guo-fei-xiong-penname-yang-maodong-yang-mao-dong
and http://www.hrichina.org/en/defenders/guo-feixiong. 