Thailand:  Immediately drop sedition case and all proceedings against human rights lawyer Sirikan Charoensiri
October  3, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2016 / OctoberThailand: Immediately drop sedition case and all proceedings against human rights lawyer Sirikan Charoensiri​ 

The Thai Government should
immediately drop all proceedings against human rights lawyer, Sirikan Charoensiri, including
the specious accusation of sedition, which apparently relate to her organization’s
representation of 14 student activists peacefully protesting in June 2015, the
International Commission of Jurists (ICJ), Human Rights Watch, Amnesty
International, Asian Forum for Human Rights and Development (FORUM-ASIA), the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (an FIDH–OMCT
partnership), Protection International (PI), Lawyers Rights Watch Canada (LRWC),
Fortify Rights, and the International Service for Human Rights (ISHR), said today.


 c) TLHR
On 27 September 2016, Sirikan
Charoensiri, a lawyer and documentation specialist at Thai Lawyers
for Human Rights (TLHR), received a summons from the Thai Police following accusations that
she violated Article 12 of the Head of National Council for Peace and Order (NCPO)
Order 3/2015, prohibiting the gathering of five or more people for political
purposes, and Article 116 of the Thai Criminal Code, a ‘sedition’-type offence.  According to the summons, the accusations are
made by an army officer, Lieutenant Colonel Pongsarit Pawangkanan.
 
Sirikan Charoensiri received the summons,
dated 20 September 2016, when she returned to Thailand after attending the 33rd
Session of the Human Rights Council in Geneva where she conducted advocacy on
the human rights situation in Thailand on behalf of FORUM-ASIA and the ICJ.  Sirikan Charoensiri did not receive an earlier
summons, dated 14 September 2016, the police claimed had been sent to her apartment,
as she was not home at the time.
 
Sirikan Charoensiri
has already been charged with two offences under the Criminal
Code of Thailand: “giving false information regarding a criminal offence” and
“refusing to comply with the order of an official” in relation to
TLHR’s provision of legal aid to 14 student activists – the new summons appears
to relate to the same case.
 
International Commission of Jurists:
 
“The army’s accusation
that Sirikan Charoensiri has violated the
frequently abused sedition law with its extremely serious penalties and risk of
a military trial is indefensible and must be withdrawn immediately,” said
Wilder Tayler, Secretary General of the ICJ. 
“The fact that the authorities have made these accusations more than one
year after TLHR’s clients were charged with sedition in the same case suggest the
accusations have been made in retaliation for her high-profile national and
international human rights advocacy since the military coup.”
 
Human Rights Watch:
 
“It’s outrageous that
Thai authorities are even considering charging lawyer Sirikan Charoensiri for
defending her clients, and it will be doubly so if they haul her before a
fundamentally unfair military court,” said Brad Adams, Asia director at Human
Rights Watch. “By seeking to intimidate lawyers who represent government
opponents, the Thai junta is showing its deep-seated fear of the rule of
law.”  
 
Amnesty International:
 
“The new accusations
against Sirikan Charoensiri once again demonstrate the willingness of Thai
authorities to retaliate against lawyers and activists engaging in the
important work of defending human rights and the rule of law,” said Rafendi
Djamin, Amnesty International’s Director for South East Asia and the Pacific.
“The Thai government should reverse course and take seriously its obligation to
protect the independence of lawyers and their freedom to defend their clients
without fear of retaliation, and to create an environment where all are able to
freely and safely speak out about human rights violations.”
 
Asian Forum for Human Rights and Development:
 
“Summoning
human rights lawyer Sirikan Charoensiri for a sedition-type charge under Article
116 of the Thai Criminal Code is a clear case of retaliation against human
rights defenders who advocate for the human rights situation in Thailand after
the coup in May 2014,” said Betty Yolanda, the Director of FORUM-ASIA. “If
indicted, Sirikan Charoensiri's legitimate human rights work might be hindered
by possible travel restrictions to take part in international human rights advocacy
work given that prior permission to travel abroad has to be obtained from the
National Council for Peace and Order (NCPO).”
 
FIDH (International Federation for Human Rights):
 
“The authorities’
ongoing harassment against Sirikan Charoensiri shows that the Thai Government is just
paying lip service to its commitment to protect human rights defenders,” said
Dimitris Christopoulos, FIDH President.
 
World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT):
 
“The
accusations against Sirikan Charoensiri are a blatant and calculated
attempt to thwart her legitimate work as a human rights lawyer,” said Gerald
Staberock, OMCT Secretary-General. “The crackdown against human rights
defenders, including pro-democracy activists, has to stop and all accusations
and charges against Sirikan Charoensiri must be immediately dropped.”
 
Protection International:

"The number of
legal cases brought against human rights defenders for reporting and addressing
human rights violations is increasing in Thailand, and women human rights defenders
are especially at risk," said Liliana De Marco Coenen, Executive Director
of Protection International. "Since the beginning of the year, eight out
of the ten
human rights defenders who have been charged with criminal offences are
women."
 
Lawyers Rights Watch Canada:
 
“The
addition of new accusations against Sirikan Charoensiri is
alarming, as they appear to be a reprisal for her work as a lawyer and a human
rights defender,” said Gail Davidson, Executive Director of LRWC.
“Thailand approved the General Assembly resolution calling on all nations to protect
human rights defenders and must now meets its international human
rights obligations by ensuring the immediate withdrawal of all accusations
against Sirikan Charoensiri.”
 
Fortify Rights:
 
“Targeting Sirikan
Charoensiri for her legitimate work as a human rights lawyer is yet another
attempt by the authorities to foment a climate of fear,” said Amy Smith,
Executive Director at Fortify Rights.  “Thai authorities
should treat human rights defenders as valuable members of society rather than
enemies of the state.”
 
International Service for Human Rights:
 
“The spurious
accusations against human rights lawyer Sirikan Charoensiri should be withdrawn
immediately and unconditionally,” said Phil Lynch, Director, International
Service for Human Rights.  “Thailand has
a clear duty to protect human rights defenders under international law and
standards and so it is particularly concerning that these accusations may be in
retaliation for her human rights advocacy since the military coup.”
 
Background
 
The 20 September 2016
summons did not set out any precise grounds for the accusations, but they
appear to relate to TLHR’s provision of legal aid to 14 student activists who were
arrested on 26 June 2015 after carrying out peaceful protests calling for
democracy and an end to military rule. 

 
If ultimately indicted
for these alleged offences, Sirikan Charoensiri is likely to face trial in a military court as
they appear to pre-date the Head of NCPO’s 12 September 2016 Order 55/2016
phasing out the prosecution of civilians in military courts.
 
Article 12 of Head of
NCPO Order 3/2015 (which prohibits the public assembly of five or more people
for political purposes) carries a maximum penalty of six months’ imprisonment
or a fine not exceeding 10,000 Thai Baht or both.  The ‘sedition’-type offence under Article 116
of the Thai Criminal Code carries a maximum sentence of seven years’
imprisonment.
 
Head of NCPO Order
3/2015 and Article 116, which impose broadly worded and ambiguous restrictions
on the exercise of freedom of expression, freedom of association, and freedom
of peaceful assembly violate Thailand’s legal obligations under international
human rights law and are inconsistent with basic rule of law and human rights
principles. For example, Article 116 criminalises any act carried out “in order to… raise unrest
and disaffection amongst the people in a manner likely to cause disturbance in
the country.”
 
The International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), to which Thailand is a Party,
guarantees the right to peaceful assembly, freedom of expression, freedom of
association, and the prohibition of arbitrary arrest or detention.
 
The UN Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders affirms the right of everyone to peacefully oppose human
rights violations. It prohibits retaliation, threats and other harassment
against anyone who takes peaceful action against human rights violations, both
within and beyond the exercise of their professional duties.
 
The UN Basic Principles
on the Role of Lawyers provide that governments are to ensure that lawyers are
able to perform their professional functions without intimidation, hindrance,
harassment or improper interference.
Signed:
1.    International
Commission of Jurists (ICJ)
2.    Human Rights Watch
3.    Amnesty International
4.    Asian Forum for Human
Rights and Development (FORUM-ASIA)
5.    FIDH (International
Federation for Human Rights)
6.    World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT)
7.    Protection
International
8.    Lawyers Rights Watch
Canada 
9.    Fortify Rights
10. International Service
for Human Rights (ISHR) 