India: Time to put promises into action. A call for ratification of UN Torture Convention and the adoption of a strong anti-torture law
November  8, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / 2018 / NovemberIndia: Time to put promises into action. A call for ratification of UN Torture Convention and the adoption of a strong anti-torture law 
Geneva, Nov 8: A two-day conference on
anti-torture legislation in India has underscored that 11 years after signing
the UN Convention Against
Torture (CAT), India
has still not ratified it nor passed a national law on the issue. 
The Commonwealth Human
Rights Initiative (CHRI), the
World Organisation
against Torture (OMCT), People’s Watch, Quill Foundation, the International
Commission of Jurists and Project 39 A from the National Law
University, Delhi,
conducted the conference “On
Strengthening Legal Protection Against Torture in India” on
October 26 and 27, 2018 with nearly 80 experts, lawyers, academics, journalists
and activists. 
The conference, which saw the
participation of Claude Heller, Vice-President of the UN Committee Against
Torture, and OMCT Secretary General, Gerald Staberock, aimed to mobilize civil
society and to urge the Indian Government to ratify the UNCAT as well as to
legislate an effective domestic anti-torture law, which is to these days still
lacking. The experts also benefitted from their presence to discuss the ratification
of the Convention with the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) and
representatives of the Ministry of Justice. 
The United Nations Torture Convention is
the universal blueprint and global consensus on the eradication of torture and
cruel and inhuman or degrading treatment. It is paradox that the worlds’
largest democracy stays outside this system alongside North Korea and a few
other states. The Indian Government has now repeatedly pledged the ratification
of the UN Convention Against Torture, including twice to the United Nations in
the course of the last year, and has been questioned by the Indian Supreme
Court on this issue. The participants agreed on the urgency of ratification and
making this process spearheading domestic anti-torture reforms. 
The backdrop for this conference was a
country that claims to consider torture “alien” to its culture, while turning a
blind eye to the hundreds – perhaps thousands – of instances of torture and
ill-treatment and custodial deaths that surface in India every year. Indeed, panelists
took a very strong view of excesses by police and paramilitary forces across
the country; especially in vulnerable areas such as Kashmir or Chhattisgarh,
where torture is rampantly used by the State as a weapon against dissents. 
Justice (Retd.) A.P. Shah, the former
Chairman of the 20th Law Commission of India, strongly condemned the tacit
acceptance of this practice. “Some judges are convinced that without
torture, evidence-gathering and subsequent conviction is not possible.”, he
said. “This acceptance of torture in India is an open secret and [torturous]
treatment meted out to certain communities is accepted as par for the course
for “justice and safety” of the country”. A common misconception, according to
Frederick Rawski, Asia Pacific Director of the International Commission of
Jurists who stressed that the abolition of torture, on the contrary, “unites
people in their support for the police, the judiciary and other state
mechanisms and thus serves to strengthen national security."
The discussions highlighted a shared concern over the
denial of the Indian government to recognize torture as a specific crime. In 2017, the Law Commission of India recommended the government to
ratify the UNCAT and frame a standalone an anti-torture law, of which it proposed
a draft; however, while a step in the right direction, the draft bill proposed by the Law Commission does not
bare essential requirements for a solid law. 
As a consequence, torture in India often
go unreported, also due to a failure of doctors to report on torture. “Even in the NCRB (National Crimes Record Bureau),
torture never figures as a reason for custodial deaths. There is a general
lack of outrage against this institutionalized brutality by law enforcement
agencies,” said Jinee Lokaneeta, a rights activist, writer and professor
at Drew University in New Jersey.
Stressing on the need for doctors to
provide detailed medical reports on torture victims and for a reform of the
post-mortem process in custodial deaths, members of Human Rights Watch showed with examples how glaringly obvious instances
of death by torture are consistently denied by the medical establishments. 
Panelists also emphasized that India, as
the world’s largest democracy, must ratify the UNCAT.This is even more needed
considering that India has recently joined the UN Human Rights Council, and
has, in the process, made an array of promises to defend human rights. 
“The UNCAT might not be the solution
alone, but it is definitely part of the solution. And we can use it to come to
a solution ” said Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of the OMCT. “We have
learned all over the world, that ratification and commitment to the Convention
can be a turning point making protections real. Governments, civil society and
especially national human rights institutions around the world have taken a
lead in this process around the world. It is time for India to do the same and
join the universal anti-torture movement”. 