Parallel Event: UN Human Rights Council 31st Session on ASIA's Failed Criminal Justice Institutions &  its Impact On Human rights in the Region
March  7, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Events / 2016 / MarchParallel Event: UN Human Rights Council 31st Session on ASIA's Failed Criminal Justice Institutions &  its Impact On Human rights in the Region
Parallel Event: UN Human
Rights Council 31st Session
ASIA: Failed Criminal Justice Institutions & 
its Impact On Human rights in the Region
Date: Monday, 7 March 2016
Time: 16:00 to 17:30
Venue: Room XXI, Palais des Nations
Speakers:

Mr. Basil Fernando, Director, Programmes
and Policies, ALRC, & Right Livelihood Laureate 2014;
Mr.
Gerald Staberock,
Secretary General, OMCT;
Mr.
Adilur Rahman Khan,
Secretary, Odhikar, H.R. Advocate, Supreme Court of Bangladesh; 
Dr. Sergei Golubok,
Human Rights Lawyer, Russia.

The Asian Legal Resource Centre (ALRC), in
collaboration with CIVICUS: World Alliance for Citizen Participation, World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), Bread for the World: Protestant Development Service, and the Right
Livelihood Award Foundation invites you to a parallel event on ASIA: Failed criminal justice institutions
and its impact on human rights in the region. 
Universal
human rights norms and state obligations to protect and promote human rights
are unachievable without suitably functioning domestic justice institutions.
This is because only proper justice frameworks can breathe life into human
rights guarantees.
The
police, prosecution, and the judiciary are vital tools in human rights work.
These institutions form the central architecture of the machinery, tasked with
two important and inseparable roles: creating deterrence to human rights
violations, and prescribing and providing remedies when violations occur. 
Unfortunately,
in the Asian context, most states use the police, prosecution, and judiciary to
restrict or violate human rights. Asian states maintain these three vital
institutions as pliable instruments that they can use to limit freedom and deny
dignity to their own people with impunity.
This event will discuss substantively the
reasons for the prevailing appalling situation of Asian justice institutions
and human rights and the real challenges to achieving protection from human
rights abuses.
Moderator: Mr. Bijo
Francis, Executive Director, Asian Legal Resource Centre, Hong Kong. 
Welcome
Address: Mr. Sharan Srinivas, Director, Research &
Advocacy, Right Livelihood Award Foundation
For
event details please contact: 
Mr. Md. Ashrafuzzaman 
zaman@ahrc.asia
www.alrc.asia
www.humanrights.asia 