Viet Nam:  Three human rights defenders sentenced to jail
August 27, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Viet Nam / 2014 / AugustViet Nam: Three human rights defenders sentenced to jailViet Nam_Joint_2708142 pages / 326 KB​JOINT PRESS RELEASEParis-Geneva,
August 27, 2014. The arbitrary imprisonment of three human rights defenders
on trumped-up charges makes a mockery of Vietnam’s human rights commitments and
obligations, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (a
joint programme of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture - OMCT)
together with the Vietnam Committee on Human Rights (VCHR) said today.
Today, the Dong Thap Provincial People’s Court sentenced Ms. Bui Thi
Minh Hang, 50, to three years in prison, Mr. Nguyen Van Minh, 34, to two years and six months, and Ms. Nguyen Thi
Thuy Quynh, 28, to two years in prison. They had been charged under Article 245, paragraph 2, of the Criminal
Code for “causing public disorder”. The three remain detained in An Binh
Commune, Cao Lanh City, Dong Thap Province.
Police intercepted, harassed, and prevented scores of activists from
attending the trial. Defence lawyers unsuccessfully requested a postponement of the proceedings after the court refused to hear
testimony from 14 witnesses presented by the defence.
“Eight months after being elected to the UN Human Rights Council,
Viet Nam continues its business-as-usual repression of all voices of dissent”, said FIDH President Karim Lahidji. “Viet Nam’s pledges to improve its legal
and judicial system and to adopt policies and measures to ensure respect of
human rights have not materialised. It’s time for the international community
to make the release of all political prisoners, including human rights
defenders, a key demand in its interaction with Hanoi”, he added.
Since January 2014, Viet Nam has detained or imprisoned at least nine
bloggers and human rights defenders. Viet Nam currently holds about 200
political prisoners, the largest number in Southeast Asia.
“Voicing
your opinion, travelling to visit other prisoners or advocating for the rights
of others is a right  – but never a criminal offense. The ruling of today
is a shameful example of a judiciary not fulfilling its tasks as protector of
rights but serving as a willful instrument of power”, noted Gerald
Staberock, OMCT Secretary General in a comment. “We should all remember that
the baseline agreement of any state pretending to undertake reforms is that
those speaking out on human rights can do so in safety”.
Police arrested Bui Thi Minh Hang, Nguyen Thi Thuy Quynh, and Nguyen Van
Minh on February 11, 2014, in Lap Vo District, Dong Thap Province, as the three
were travelling from Ho Chi Minh City to Dong Thap Province to visit former
political prisoner Nguyen Bac Truyen and his wife. Two days earlier, police had
raided the couple’s home and taken Truyen into custody.
Bui Thi Minh Hang, Nguyen Thi Thuy Quynh, and Nguyen Van Minh are
particularly known for their peaceful campaigns for religious freedom, the
release of political prisoners, and their support to victims of land
confiscation.
“The Vietnamese Government
must immediately and unconditionally release the three human rights defenders and
all other political prisoners”, said VCHR President Vo Van Ai. “The international community must
demand that Hanoi match its words with actions”, he urged.
For more
information, please contact:
·      
VCHR: Penelope
Faulkner (Vietnamese/English) - Tel: +33 1 45 98 30 85
·       FIDH:
Andrea Giorgetta (English) - Tel: +66 88 6117722 (Bangkok) / Audrey Couprie
(French/English/Spanish) - Tel: +33 6 48 05 91 57 (Paris) / Arthur Manet
(French/English/Spanish) - Tel: +33 6 72 28 42 94 (Paris)
·      
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau
/ Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui 
(French/English/Spanish) - Tel: +41 22 809 49 39 (Geneva) 