Bahrain:  European Parliament urges Bahrain’s King to lift Nabeel Rajab’s travel ban and drop charges
November 20, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Bahrain / 2015 / NovemberBahrain: European Parliament urges Bahrain’s King to lift Nabeel Rajab’s travel ban and drop chargesBahrain_2015.11.20_Joint_PR_EN_AR5 pages / 2.70 MB​













19
November 2015On 19 November 2015, Member
of the European Parliament Mr. Pier Antonio Panzeri, together with 80 Members
of the European Parliament (MEPs), issued a letter to Bahrain’s King Shaikh
Hamad bin Isa Al-Khalifa, calling on the Bahraini government to immediately
lift the travel ban and drop all charges against human rights defender Nabeel Rajab. The undersigned 20
international NGOs welcome the letter and echo the call to lift Mr. Rajab’s
travel ban and end the judicial harassment against him.
 
Mr. Rajab, a prominent human
rights defender, is currently subject to a travel ban and faces up to 10 years
in prison for exercising his right to freedom of expression in Bahrain. Mr.
Rajab is President of the Bahrain Center for Human Rights (BCHR), Founding
Director of the Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR), Deputy Secretary General
of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and a member of the
Advisory Committee of Human Rights Watch’s Middle East Division.                                                   
 
Mr. Rajab previously
served a two-year sentence in 2012 for three cases related to his participation
in peaceful gatherings in favour of fundamental freedoms and democracy. On 1
October 2014, he was arrested and detained for one month over a tweet he wrote
while in Europe, and was sentenced to six months in prison on 20 January 2015
for “publicly insulting official institutions.” He was released early after a
pardon was issued by the King on 13 July 2015, following heavy criticism by the
international community, and an Urgency Resolution issued by the European
Parliament on his case on 9 July 2015. On the day of his release, the Public
Prosecution imposed a new travel ban on Mr. Rajab in relation to another
criminal case, for which he had been previously arrested on 2 April 2015. He was
charged with "insulting a statutory body" and “disseminating false
rumours in time of war,” for which he could face up to 10 years in prison,
following a series of tweets and opinion pieces he wrote in March 2015
regarding the treatment to which Jaw prisoners were subjected and Bahrain’s
involvement in the Saudi-led coalition in Yemen. 
 
In their letter (linked here),
the MEPs highlight that the Bahraini government’s treatment of Mr. Rajab was in
breach of international human rights law, as his detention violated the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights. Further, the MEPs recall the European Parliament’s
Urgency Resolution of 9 July 2015 which calls for all charges against Mr. Rajab
to be dropped, referring to his release as “only a ‘half measure’” as he “remains
subject to a travel ban” which “greatly limits his freedoms and is a clear
obstacle” to his human rights activities. 
 
Furthermore the MEPs
call for the implementation of the recommendations of the Bahrain Independent
Commission of Inquiry (BICI)’s 2011 report, the UN Human Rights Council’s 2012
Universal Period Review on Bahrain, and the European Union’s repeated calls about
the human rights situation in Bahrain, via the March 2012, January 2013,
September 2013 and February 2014 Urgency Resolutions on the Human Rights
situation on Bahrain. The signatory members of the European Parliament particularly
condemn the “criminalisation of dissent and free speech” in Bahrain, and the ill-treatment
and imprisonment of hundreds of human rights defenders, civil and political
activists, including minors. 
 
The signatory NGOs
support the MEPs’ call to the government of Bahrain to respect its human rights
obligations. Accordingly, we call on the Bahraini government to drop all
charges against Nabeel Rajab and lift his travel ban, and fully implement the
BICI recommendations and abide by its obligations under international human
rights law.  The European Union should
concretely take action to prevent human rights abuses and stop the prosecution
of peaceful human rights defenders by the Bahraini authorities. 
 
The
signatory NGOs:
 
Americans
for Democracy and Human Rights in Bahrain (ADHRB)
Amnesty
International
Arabic
Network for Human Rights Information (ANHRI)
Bahrain
Institute for Rights and Democracy (BIRD)
Bahrain
Center for Human Rights (BCHR)
Canadian Journalists for Free Expression (CJFE)
CIVICUS
English
PEN
European
Centre for Democracy and Human Rights (ECDHR)
Front
Line Defenders
Gulf
Centre for Human Rights (GCHR)
Index
on Censorship
International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) under the Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders
International
Service For Human Rights (ISHR)
Lawyer's
Rights Watch Canada
Maharat
Foundation
PEN
International
Rafto
Foundation for Human Rights
Reporters
Without Borders (RSF)
World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) under the Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders 