China:  Follow-up of case CHN 260810_Release of Kalsang Tsultrim, a 30-year-old Tibetan monk, arbitrarly detained
November 26, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / China / 2010 / NovemberChina: Follow-up of case CHN 260810_Release of Kalsang Tsultrim, a 30-year-old Tibetan monk, arbitrarly detainedCase CHN 260810.1Follow-up of case CHN 260810
Release
The International Secretariat
of OMCT has received new information in the following situation in the People’s Republic of China.Brief description of the situation 
TheInternational
Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by The Tibetan Centre for Human Rights
and Democracy (TCHRD), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the release
of Kalsang Tsultrim (aka Gyitsang
Takmig), a 30-year-old Tibetan monk from Gyitsang Gaden Choekorling Monastery
in Sangchu County, Kanlho “Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture” (TAP), Gansu Province, on 15 October 2010. Kalsang Tsultrim had been arrested on 27
 July 2010 and
subsequently detained incommunicado. 
According to the information received, Kalsang
Tsultrim was transferred to different prisons during his detention. He was
reportedly released from Kanlho Prefecture prison under the condition not to
participate in any political-related work. 
OMCT welcomes the release of Kalsang Tsultrim although
it deplores the terms of his release. OMCT also remains deeply concerned about
his physical and psychological integrity. 
Background
information
OMCT had earlier been informed about the arbitrary arrest and subsequent
incommunicado detention of Kalsang Tsultrim. OMCT feared that he may be at risk
of torture and ill-treatment. 
According to the information
received, on 27
 July 2010, Kalsang
Tsultrim, along with another Tibetan who was later released, was arrested by
the police at Dzoge County, in Sichuan Province, and taken to Tsoe (Hezuo) Public Security
Bureau (PSB) Detention Centre. Kalsang Tsultrim’s family, who was informed
about his arrest by the aforementioned individual, went to Tsoe PSB Detention
Centre to inquire about the reason of his detention. Not only did the police
refuse to communicate any information about Kalsang Tsultrim’s arrest and
detention, but they also denied the family any contact with him. 
According to the same information, in 2009, Kalsang
Tsultrim recorded and distributed videos on Tibetan history since the flight of
the Dalai Lama into exile. He also wrote a book which illustrates the concerns
of the Tibetan people. Since then, Kalsang Tsultrim had been reportedly on the
move. OMCT was seriously preoccupied that Kalsang Tsultrim was arrested solely
for exercising his right to freedom of expression. 
Remarks
OMCT wishes to thank all of the individuals and
organisations that have taking action as a response to the urgent appeal. No
further action is currently required on your part concerning this case. 
***
Geneva, 26 November 2010. 