Egypt:  Ongoing harassment and restrictions to freedom of association against several human rights organisations
March 16, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2016 / MarchEgypt: Ongoing harassment and restrictions to freedom of association against several human rights organisationsNew information
EGY 003 / 0615 / OBS 049.2
Harassment /
Restrictions to freedom of association
Egypt
March 16, 2016
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Egypt.
New information:
The Observatory has been informed by
reliable sources about the ongoing harassment and the restrictions to freedom
of association faced by several Egyptian human rights organisations, including
the Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies (CIHRS), a member organisation of
FIDH, the Arab
Center for the Independence of the Judiciary and the Legal Profession (ACIJLP)
and the Land Center for Human Rights (LCHR), two member organisations of OMCT,
as well as Nazra for Feminist Studies. 
According to information received, on
March 13 and 14, 2016, two staff members of CIHRS and three staff members of
Nazra for Feminist Studies were notified by telephone of a summons to appear on
March 16 before the Investigating Judge in Cairo within the framework of
criminal case No. 173/2011, known as the “foreign funding case against NGOs”.
However, the two staff members of CIHRS refused to appear, as they had not been
properly notified in person in accordance with the law in force[1]. 
These summons are the latest incident of a
campaign of judicial harassment launched by the authorities in 2011 targeting
civil society organisations in Egypt. As the investigation has been ongoing for
nearly five years[2],
the scope of the case remains unknown.
Some sources have alleged that 37 NGOs
would be targeted under this “foreign funding case against NGOs”. It would include ACIJLP, CIHRS, LCHR, the
Egyptian Democratic Academy (EDA), the Hisham Mubarak Law Center (HMLC), the
Arabic Network for Human Rights Information (ANHRI), the Egyptian Initiative
for Personal Rights (EIPR), El Nadim Center for the Management and
Rehabilitation of victims of violence, the Egyptian Center for Economic and
Social Rights (ECESR), the Arab Penal Reform Organization, the Egyptian Center
for the Right to Education, El-Haq, the Egyptian Association for Community
Participation Enhancement (ACPE), Nazra for Feminist Studies, the Appropriate
Communications Technologies (ACT), among others.
The
Observatory urges the Egyptian authorities to immediately cease all acts of
harassment against human rights organisations, and to comply with its
Constitution (in particular Article 78 and Article 93 of the 2014 Egyptian
Constitution which respectively recognise freedom of association and Egypt's compliance with international human rights
conventions ratified by Egypt) as well as its international legal
obligations (in particular Article 22 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights (ICCPR)) and its international commitment to respect
freedom of association in the framework of its Universal Periodic Review (UPR)[3].

The
Observatory reminds in particular the Egyptian authorities of their pledges
made during the UPR during which they “affirmed that civil society is an
essential partner to the government in strengthening human rights”[4].

Background information:
Since 2011, the Egyptian government has launched a
judicial harassment campaign against civil society organisations on the pretext
that they received unauthorised foreign funding under criminal case No. 173/2011.
The first set of investigations targeted international
and foreign NGOs. On June 4, 2013, the North Cairo Criminal Court sentenced 43
Egyptian and foreign staff members of five foreign civil society organisations
to imprisonment ranging from one (suspended) to five years of prison for “managing
unlicensed branches” of their organisations, “conducting research, political
training, surveys, and workshops without licenses”, “training political parties
and groups” and “illegally receiving foreign funding”[5].
Though none of the defendants were forced to serve their sentences, the court
ordered the confiscation of their funds and the closure of Egypt-based branches
of Freedom House, the International Republican Institute, the National
Democratic Institute, the International Centre for Journalists (ICFJ), and
Konrad Adenauer Foundation. 
The second case is believed to target Egyptian civil
society organisations that have received foreign or international funding. It
started with the ultimatum made by the Ministry of Social Solidarity (MoSS)[6]
for Egyptian human rights organisations to register by late 2014 under Law
84/2002 or face closure. One month later, a new wave of harassment targeting
human rights NGOs began. 
In September 2014, President Al-Sisi signed into law
amendments to Article 78 of the Penal Code. These amendments include the
provision that receiving foreign funding for the purpose of “harming national
security” is punishable by life imprisonment.
In late 2014, the Investigating Judge in charge of the
case appointed a technical committee from the MoSS[7] to determine
whether Egyptian organisations under review operate as civic associations
without being registered as such under Law 84/2002, and to examine documents
related to their sources of funding. The committee first examined the Egyptian
Democratic Academy (EDA). It is noteworthy to note
that despite the EDA's registration in compliance with the ultimatum[8], they are still being
investigated. In January 2015, the judge issued travel bans against four
staff members and founders of the organisation[9].
In June 2015, the Director of the human rights
organisation United Group was interrogated by the
Investigating Judge about its sources of funding and legal status[10]. In March 2016, the United Group was summonsed for the
fourth time.
On June 9, 2015, the Investigating Judge mandated the
technical committee to visit the Cairo office of the CIHRS in order to examine
whether the CIHRS engages in activities of civic associations under the
provisions of Law 84/2002. The committee requested the staff present in the
office to provide documentation relating to the administration of the NGO, such
as its registration, founding contract and statute, as well as the budgets,
financial accounts, and funding contracts for the past four years. One additional
demand the staff were instructed to comply with was to provide documentation
that proved that the CIHRS was not conducting NGO work. 
On June 16, 2015, the CIHRS was presented
with a summons letter to appear on June 17, before the Investigating Judge within
the framework of the case No. 173/2011. However, the CIHRS refused to accept
the summons letter as it failed to comply with the legal requirements in force
and subsequently submitted its arguments in
writing to the representative of the Investigating Judge. Since then, CIHRS and
its members had not received any further summons, until those of March 13 and
14, 2016 (see above).
In July 2015, the HMLC was also
subjected to the same review.
In December 2015, the ANHRI received a
phone call from the technical committee, which asked to conduct an inspection,
but due to the absence of ANHRI’s Director, Mr. Gamal Eid, the visit was
postponed and eventually did not take place. On February 4, 2016, Mr. Gamal Eid was informed of a travel ban
as he was attempting to travel outside Egypt. 
In December 2015, the Egyptian Center
for the Right to Education was summoned by the Investigating Judge for
questioning.
Actions requested:
Please write to the authorities of Egypt
asking them to:
Put an end to all forms of harassment against all human rights
organisations and defenders in Egypt;
Revise the law on associations to comply with international human
rights standards, while ensuring that independent civil society
organisations are meaningfully consulted in the drafting process;
Withdraw the ultimatum and stop immediately investigations and
criminal cases targeting human rights NGOs;
Comply with all the provisions of the
United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular with:
           - its Article 1, which provides that
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
           - its Article 5(a): “For the purpose of
promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, everyone has
the right, individually and in association with others, at the national and
international levels (a) To meet or assemble peacefully”
           - its Article 6(a), which foresees that
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
participate in peaceful activities against violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms”;
           - its
Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures
to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually
and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by Egypt.
Addresses:
·      
President of the Arab Republic of Egypt,
H.E. Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 23901998
·      
Prime Minister, Mr. Ibrahim Mehleb, Magles El Shaab Street, Kasr El Aini
Street, Cairo, Egypt. Fax: + 202 2735 6449 / 27958016. Email: primemin@idsc.gov.eg
·      
Minister of the Interior, General Mohamed Ibrahim Moustafa, Ministry of
the Interior, El-Sheikh Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: moi1@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2579 2031 / 2794
5529
·      
Minister of Justice, Mr. Ahmed Al-Zanad, Ministry of Justice, Magles El
Saeb Street, Wezaret Al Adl, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2795 8103
·      
Public Prosecutor, Counsellor Hisham Barakat Dar al-Qadha al-Ali, Ramses
Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 2577 4716
·      
Mr. Mohamed Fayeq, President of the National Council For Human Rights,
Fax: + 202 25747497 / 25747670. Email: nchr@nchr.org.eg
·       H.E. Ms. Wafaa Bassim, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United
Nations in Geneva, 49 avenue Blanc, 1202 Genève, Switzerland, Email: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41 22 738 44 15
·       Embassy of Egypt in Brussels, 19 avenue de
l’Uruguay, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 675.58.88; Email: embassy.egypt@skynet.be
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Egypt in
your respective country.


[1]                 The three staff
members of Nazra will be represented by a lawyer.


[2]                
The investigation started in September 2011, and the raid on NGOs took place in
December 2011. For more information, please see: http://www.cihrs.org/?p=720&lang=en &
http://www.cihrs.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/The-Complaint.pdf


[3]                 At the occasion of the UPR of
Egypt in November 2014, the Egyptian authorities accepted at least five
recommendations on the protection of human rights defenders, including a
commitment to reforming the current NGO law with a wide consultation of NGOs,
and a commitment to guarantee the right to freedom of association in accordance
with international standards.


[4]      See Oral statement by the Egyptian
Delegation, http://www.upr-info.org/sites/default/files/document/egypt/session_20_-_october_2014/egypt_upr_egy_42.pdf.


[5]
See https://www.fidh.org/International-Federation-for-Human-Rights/north-africa-middle-east/egypt/urgent-statement-on-the-situation-in-egypt-13383
and http://www.omct.org/human-rights-defenders/urgent-interventions/egypt/2013/06/d22265/.


[6]      The ultimatum was made public in July
2014, and in September 2014, the deadline was pushed back to November 10, 2014.


[7]      The committee is composed of Ministry of
Social Solidarity officials but they report to the Investigating Judge. 


[8]
The EDA has been registered under the Associations Law No. 84/2002 since
September 2014.


[9]      These
are Messrs. Hossam al-Din Ali, Chairman of the EDA, Ahmed Ghoneim,
Deputy, as well as Ms. Israa Abdel Fattah and Bassem Samir, who
previously worked in the same organisation. For more information, see
http://www.cihrs.org/?p=10572&lang=en.


[10]    The
United Group is a law firm established 50 years ago, and headed by Mr. Negad El
Borai, one of Egypt’s most influential human rights defenders and lawyers.


​ 