20.11.2008 / 2008 Universal Children's Day: Child right to be protected from violence must not be clashed by relativisms
November 20, 2008
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / 2008 / November20.11.2008 / 2008 Universal Children's Day: Child right to be protected from violence must not be clashed by relativismsGeneva, 20th November 2008 – On the occasion of the Universal Children’s Day, and in the view of the forthcoming International Symposium organised by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) on 4 and 5 December in Geneva on “Torture: cultural, political and economical relativisms: the clash of convictions”, OMCT wishes to express its concern at the alarming consequences of the erosion of the absolute prohibition of torture for the rights of children to receive protection from torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Despite the clear recognition in the 1993 Vienna Declaration that all human rights, including children’s human rights, are universal, interdependent and indivisible, these principles are now seriously challenged by political intentions including security and counter-terrorism policies as well as by economic imperatives and claims that prioritise cultural identity over the promotion of human rights. Facts show that children are not spared from the serious human rights violations resulting from the so-called war against terrorism. Since 2002, many individuals below 18 years of age have reportedly been captured and detained in US-governed detention centres in Afghanistan, in Iraq and in Guantanamo Bay. As an example, Omar Khadr, a Canadian citizen who was 15 years old when he was arrested in Afghanistan, has been detained in the US military base at Guantanamo Bay since October 2002. Despite his age, he was exposed to the same abuses and violations as adult prisoners. After having been repeatedly rescheduled, and despite various calls from human rights groups for Omar’s repatriation to Canada, his trial is now set for 26 January 2009. It will most likely be held by a military commission in Guantanamo Bay. The primacy of economic imperatives too often result in widespread – and sometimes forced – child labour in harmful and unsafe conditons. Where most of economic objectives fail to respect human rights, children may also become exposed to other forms of exploitation. Sexual exploitation, like pornography and prostitution, puts children particularly at risk. As regards cultural values, while many of them respect the human rights of children, a small number compromise their protection from torture and other forms of violence. In certain situations, communities and authorities continue to accept the practice of harmful traditions particularly against girls such as the female genital mutilation and honour crimes that OMCT frequently denounced through urgent appeals and shadow reports. The Universal Children’s Day and the OMCT International Symposium on 4 and 5 December are both important opportunities to strongly reaffirm the universality of all human rights, including the right of each and every child to enjoy full protection from all forms of violence, including torture. Contact: Child Rights activities Coordinator: Cécile Trochu Grasso: ctg@omct.org 