Equatorial Guinea:  Serious concerns for the safety of Mr Roberto Berardi, an Italian businessman currently detained in the prison of Bata
February 28, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Equatorial Guinea / 2014 / FebruaryEquatorial Guinea: Serious concerns for the safety of Mr Roberto Berardi, an Italian businessman currently detained in the prison of Bata 
Case GNQ 280214 
Torture and ill-treatment/
Solitary confinement/ Denial of medical care/ Fear for safety
The International Secretariat
of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Equatorial Guinea. 
Brief description of the situation
TheInternational Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable
source about the alleged torture, prolonged detention in solitary confinement
and poor health of Mr Roberto Berardi,
an Italian businessman, born on 5 January 1965 in Latina (Italy), detained
since February 2013 in the prison of Bata, in the city of Bata. OMCT fears for
his safety. 
 
According to the information
received, Mr Roberto Berardi has spent more than two months in isolation in the
prison of Bata after receiving a visit from a representative of the Italian
embassy in Cameroon (also covering Equatorial Guinea) on 14 December 2013. The
visit reportedly took place in the presence of numerous prison officials and
prevented Mr Roberto Berardi to have a private discussion with the Italian
embassy representative. The next morning, on 15 December 2013, his cell was
searched and in the evening he was placed in solitary confinement without
further information.
Mr Roberto Berardi has reportedly
only been able to communicate with the outside world thanks to a mobile phone
that has been occasionally given to him since December. On 22 January 2014, he
managed to speak with his wife’s lawyer and informed him about his conditions
of detention. The isolation cell is about 2 and a half to 3 meters and can
reach temperatures over 40 degrees Celsius. The door is reportedly only open
once a day when he receives a bucket of water and food, which is poor and
insufficient. The cell is infested with cockroaches and horseflies, and it
lacks proper sanitation facilities. 
Since his arrest and detention
in January 2013, Mr Roberto Berardi has reportedly lost weight and has suffered
from malaria and dysentery. He has also reported having suffered torture and ill-treatment
by the prison guards on various occasions, including beating and flogging. Despite
repeated requests, he was only allowed once access to medical attention, in
June 2013. Furthermore, his lawyer has been denied access to the prison since
August 2013. 
The International Secretariat
of OMCT is gravely concerned about the physical and psychological integrity of
Mr Roberto Berardi and recalls to the authorities of Equatorial Guinea that
they are legally bound to effectively ensure the physical and psychological
integrity of all persons deprived of liberty in accordance with international
human rights law, notably the United Nations (UN) Convention Against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. 
OMCT urges the competent
authorities to ensure that Mr Roberto Berardi is immediately granted full
access to his lawyer, consular or embassy representative and proper medical
attention. 
The UN Special Rapporteur on
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment stressed
in a 2011 report to the UN General Assembly that “solitary confinement is a
harsh measure, which may cause serious psychological and physiological adverse
effects on individuals regardless of their specific conditions”. The Special
Rapporteur therefore recommended that prolonged solitary confinement, in excess
of 15 days, should be subject to an absolute prohibition (paras 79 and 88,
Report A/66/268 to the UN General Assembly, August 2011). 
Furthermore, OMCT urges the
competent authorities to carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent
and impartial investigation into the allegations of torture and ill-treatment
suffered by Mr Roberto Berardi, in accordance with international human rights
standards, the result of which must be made public, in order to bring those
responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply
penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law. 
OMCT
recalls that the authorities have to fulfil their obligations under
international human rights law to protect the right not to be subjected to
torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and to
bringing to justice those responsible for violating this right.
Background
information
According to the information
received, Mr Roberto Berardi, business partner of Mr Teodoro Obiang Nguema
Mangue, Second Vice President of Equatorial Guinea and President Obiang’s
eldest son, was arrested without a warrant late at night on 18 January 2013 at his
home in Bata. He was held without charges for 21 days during which he was
subjected to violence and denied access to a lawyer and family members. Mr
Roberto Berardi was only later informed that his business partner had accused
him of misappropriation, swindling and fraud of their company assets, Eloba
Constuccuion S.A., which is operating in the construction sector. On 26 August
2013, the Bata Provincial Court sentenced him to 2 years and 4 months
imprisonment for misappropriation. His trial was reportedly marred by
irregularities.
According to the same
information received, Mr Roberto Berardi had found out early 2013 about the
asset forfeiture action by the United States Department of Justice against the
US-based properties that his business partner had purchased by using accounts
in Equatorial Guinea banks in the name of Eloba Construccion. Mr Roberto
Berardi had subsequently raised the issue with his partner Mr Teodoro Obiang
Nguema Mangue. There are reasons to believe that Mr Roberto Berardi could be a
very damaging witness in the US investigation and was therefore arrested and
imprisoned. 

Action requested
Please
write to the authorities in Equatorial Guinea urging them to:
i.              
Guarantee, in all
circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity ofMr Roberto Berardi; 
ii.             
Cease the practice of solitary confinement and any
other punitive measures; 
iii.           
Grant Mr Roberto Berardi
full access to his lawyer, consular or embassy
representative and his family, as well as guarantee that he is promptly
examined by independent doctors and receives adequate medical care, in
accordance, inter alia, with the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of
Prisoners;
iv.           
Order his immediate release in the absence of valid
legal charges and judicial process that are consistent with international legal
standards, or, if such charges exist, bring him promptly before an impartial,
independent and competent tribunal that will ensure due process at all time and
allow the presence of international observers; 
v.             
Carry out a prompt,
effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the allegations
of torture and ill-treatment, the result of which must be made public, in order
to bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial
tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by
law;
vi.           
Guarantee the respect of human
rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with
national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
- President Teodoro
Obiang Nguema Gabinete del Presidente de la República Palacio del Pueblo Malabo,
Equatorial Guinea, Fax: +240 333 09 3313/3334
- Attorney General, David
Nguema Obiang, Fiscal General de la República, Fiscalía General de la República,
Malabo, Equatorial Guinea, Fax: +240 333 09 1338/ 4961
- Minister of Interior and Local Administration, Clemente Engonga
Nguema, Ministro de Interior y Corporaciones Locales, Ministerio del Interior y
Corporaciones Locales, Malabo, Equatorial Guinea, Fax: +240 333 09 2683/ 2688/
3406
- Permanent Mission of Equatorial Guinea to the United Nations in
Geneva, Chemin de La Voie-Creuse 3C, 1202 Geneva, Fax: +41 22 734 39 60, Email:
mision.guineaecuatorial_gva@yahoo.com
Please also write to the
embassies of Equatorial Guinea in your respective country.
Geneva, 28 February 2014
Kindly inform us of any action
undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 