China:  Arbitrary detention of Messrs. Khensur Thupten Thapkhey, Geshe Tsultrim Gyaltsen and Ven Tsundue, three Tibetan Buddhist monks
April 29, 2009
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / China / 2009 / AprilChina: Arbitrary detention of Messrs. Khensur Thupten Thapkhey, Geshe Tsultrim Gyaltsen and Ven Tsundue, three Tibetan Buddhist monksCase CHN 290409 Arbitrary detention / Fear for the physical integrity  The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the People’s Republic of China. Brief description of the situation The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Tibetan Centre for Human Rights and Democracy (TCHRD), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the arbitrary detention of Messrs. Khensur Thupten Thapkhey, Geshe Tsultrim Gyaltsen and Ven Tsundue, three Tibetan Buddhist monks from Shaften Monastery, in Nagchu County, Nagchu Prefecture, “Tibet Autonomous Region”. According to the information received, on 11 April 2009, Messrs. Khensur Thupten Thapkhey (47 year old), former abbot of Shaften Monastery, and Geshe Tsultrim Gyaltsen (34 year old), a scripture master, were arrested by the Nagchu Public Security Bureau (PSB), apparently without charges and in violation with the criminal procedures. Mr. Ven Tsundue 30 year old), Head of the Shapten Monastery’s Democratic Management Committee (DMC), was also arrested recently. According to the information received, the Nagchu PSB members told the monks of the Shaften Monastery that Messrs. Khensur Thupten Thapkhey and Geshe Tsultrim Gyaltsen had gone to Lhasa City to receive a Geshe Degree Certificate (Doctorate of Philosophy) from the religious bureau. However, in reality, the Nagchu authorities took them to a detention centre, where they are currently detained. As for Mr. Ven Tsundue, he was told by the Chinese authorities that he had to attend a meeting, but instead he was escorted to Nagchu PSB detention centre. As of issuing this urgent appeal, the International Secretariat of OMCT could not be informed about the precise reasons for which the three monks were detained. The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the safety of the above mentioned individuals, fearing that they may be subjected to ill-treatment and torture. OMCT is also preoccupied with regard to their arrest, as according to the information received, it seems solely based on their peaceful political and religious beliefs. OMCT recalls that China is a State party to the UN Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment which prohibits torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. China is also a State party to the UN International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which guarantees basic human rights and freedoms. OMCT therefore urges the authorities to conform with China’s international human rights obligations, commitments that were reaffirmed on the occasion of its election as a member of the new United Nations Human Rights Council. Actions Requested Please write to the authorities in the People’s Republic of China urging them to:   Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Khensur Thupten Thapkhey, Geshe Tsultrim Gyaltsen and Ven Tsundue;  Call upon the competent authorities to carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the events, the result of which must be made public;  Order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial, independent, competent and fair tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times, such as access to a legal representation of the detainees’ choice;  Guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country with inclusion of all its imprisoned persons in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  Mr. Wen Jiabao, Prime Minister of the People’s Republic of China, Guojia Zongli, The State Council General Office, 2 Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 65961109 (c/o Ministry of Foreign Affairs) Ms. Wu Aiying, Minister of Justice of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang Sifabu, 10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6529 2345, minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cn Mr. Yang Jiechi, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang Waijiaobu, 2 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Beijingshi 100701, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6588 2594, Email: ipc@fmprc.gov.cn; Mr. Meng Jianzhu, Minister of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang, Gong’anbu, 14 Dongchang’anjie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100741, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 63099216 Mr. Ma Zhenchuan, Director of the Beijing Public Security Bureau, Juzhang, Beijingshi Gong’anju, 9 Qianmen Dongdajie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100740, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 85222320, Email: wbjc2sohu.com Ambassador Sha Zukang, Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China, Chemin de Surville 11, P.O. Box 85, 1213 Petit-Lancy 2, Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7937014, E-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int  Please also write to the embassies of the People’s Republic of China in your respective country.  Geneva, 29 April 2009 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 