Cambodia:  Ongoing judicial harassment against Ms. Yorm Bopha and Ms. Tim Sakmony
December 21, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2012 / DecemberCambodia: Ongoing judicial harassment against Ms. Yorm Bopha and Ms. Tim Sakmony


 
URGENT
APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
New
information
KHM
006 / 1212 / OBS 119
Judicial harassment / Arbitrary detention
Cambodia
December
21, 2012
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Cambodia. 
 
New
information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by the Cambodian League for the Promotion and
Defense of Human Rights (LICADHO) of the ongoing judicial harassment against
Ms. Yorm Bopha and Tim Sakmony, two prominent land housing rights
defenders.
 
According
to the information received, on December 26, 2012 at 2 pm, Phnom Penh Municipal
Court will open the trial against Ms. Yorm Bopha and Ms. Tim Sakmony, for
“assaulting a suspected thief” and making a “false declaration” to obtain
accommodation for her disabled son. They face between six months and five years
in jail and a fine between 250 to 2,500 US dollars if found guilty. 
 
The
Observatory recalls that both were arrested in early September 2012 and have
been held in pre-trial detention since then (See background information).
 
The
Observatory fears that the authorities
have levelled baseless charges against them because of their peaceful struggle
for land and housing rights. Therefore, it reiterates
its demand on the Cambodian authorities for their immediate and unconditional
release and the lift of pending charges, as their detention and judicial
harassment seem to merely aim at obstructing their human rights activities and
appear to be a result of them exercising their right to freedoms of expression
and association.
 
Background information[1]:
 
The families from the Boeung
Kak Lake (BKL) community have been battling forced evictions since 2007, when
the Government leased their land to a company, Shukaku Inc, for development. In
May 2012, after 15 members of the BKL community were violently and arbitrarily
arrested, Ms. Yorm Bopha, 29, was at the forefront of the campaign for their
release. She maintained a high profile presence at every demonstration, became
a media spokesperson for the campaign, and did not shy away from publicly
criticizing government officials. This new- found prominence brought with it
the attention of the authorities – she was verbally threatened, harassed and
intimidated.
 
On September 4, 2012, Ms. Yorm
Bopha, 64, a pivotal figure in the protests against forced evictions of
residents from the Boeung Kak Lake community in Phnom Penh, was detained for
allegedly assaulting a person who was suspected of stealing. Ms. Bopha has
denied the allegations, saying she was not even present at the scene. She is
currently being held in pre-trial detention at Prey Sar prison in Phnom Penh,
awaiting judicial investigation for “intentional violence with aggravating
circumstances” under Article 218 of the Penal Code.
 
In a separate case, Ms. Tim
Sakmony, a leader in protests against forced evictions from Borei Keila,
another area of Phnom Penh was arrested on September 5, 2012. The arrest came
after the owner of Borei Keila developer Phanimex filed a complaint alleging
that Ms. Sakmony made a “false declaration” in a request for the Phanimex
Company to compensate her disabled son for having failed to provide him with an
apartment after his eviction from Borei Keila in January 2012. Phaminex was
originally granted land in Borei Keila conditional upon the construction of ten
apartment buildings to rehouse residents, but has only built eight buildings.
Ms. Sakmony is also being held in pre-trial detention at Prey Sar prison,
pending judicial investigation for making a “false declaration to a public body
for the purpose of obtaining an allowance, a payment or any unlawful advantage”
under Article 633 of the Penal Code.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please
write to the Cambodian authorities urging them to:
 
Guarantee, in all
     circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Yorm Bopha
     and Ms. Tim Sakmony, as well as of all human rights defenders in Cambodia;
 
Release Ms. Yorm Bopha and Ms.
     Tim Sakmony immediately and unconditionally, since their detention is
     arbitrary as it only aims at obstructing their human rights activities and appears to be a result of exercising their right to freedoms
     of expression and association;
 
Put an end to acts of
     harassment - including at the judicial level - against Ms. Yorm Bopha and
     Ms. Tim Sakmony and all human rights defenders in Cambodia;
 
Comply with all the provisions
     of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998
     by the United Nations General Assembly, in particular:
-       
its Article 1, which
states that “everyone has the right, individually or in association with
others, to promote the protection and realization of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, 
-       
Article 12.1, which
foresees that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to participate in peaceful activities against violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms”,
-       
and its Article 12.2
which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
present Declaration.”
 
v.     Guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other
international human rights instruments ratified by Cambodia.
 
Addresses: 
 
·      
Mr. Hun Sen, Prime Minister, Office
of the Prime Minister, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia, Fax: +855 23 36 06 66 /
855 23 88 06 24 (c/o Council of Ministers), Email: leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh
/ cppparty@gmail.com 
·      
Mr. H.E. Ang Vong Vathna, Minister
of Justice, No 240, Sothearos Blvd, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia, Fax: 023
364119. Email: moj@cambodia.gov.kh
·      
Mr. Sar Kheng, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister of Interior, Ministry of Interior, 275 Norodom Blvd, Phnom Penh,
Kingdom of Cambodia, Fax: + 855 23 212708. Email: moi@interior.gov.kh
·      
Mr. Hor Nam Hong, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs, 161 Preah Sisowath Quay, Phnom Penh,
Kingdom of Cambodia, Fax: + 855 23 21 61 44 / + 855 23 21 69 39. Email: mfaicasean@bigpond.com.kh
·      
Ambassador Mr. Sun Suon, Permanent
Mission of Cambodia to the United Nations in Geneva, Chemin de Taverney 3, Case
postale 213, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, Switzerland, Fax: + 41 22 788 77 74. Email: camemb.gva@mfa.gov.kh;
cambodge@bluewin.ch 
 
Please also write to the diplomatic representations of Cambodia in your
respective countries.
 
***
Geneva-Paris,
December 21, 2012
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human
Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.
 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
· Email: Appeals@fidh-omct.org

· Tel and fax FIDH: +33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 /
01 43 55 18 80
· Tel
and fax OMCT: + 41 22 809 49 39 / 41 22 809 49 29



[1] See Observatory Press Release issued
on September 13 and November 16, 2012. 