Open Letter to Mr. Marjan S?arec Prime Minister of Slovenia - Halt extradition of Mikhail Mayorov to Russia
November  6, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent Interventions / 2018 / NovemberOpen Letter to Mr. Marjan Šarec Prime Minister of Slovenia - Halt extradition of Mikhail Mayorov to Russia

OPEN LETTER TO MR. MARJAN ŠAREC
PRIME MINISTER OF SLOVENIA
Via Email <gp.kpv@gov.si> 
Geneva, 6 November 2018
Re: Halt extradition of Mikhail
Mayorov to Russia 
Dear Prime Minister,
The World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT), the leading global network of civil society organisations
against torture, summary executions, enforced disappearances and all other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in the world, is
writing to you to express its grave concern and to call upon your intervention
in relation to the case of the following individual currently detained in Koper
prison.
The OMCT has been informed by the NGO
Committee Against Torture, a member of the OMCT SOS - Torture Network, about
the case of Mr. Mikhail Mayorov, a 58 y.o. Russian national, who is currently
detained in Koper prison on an international arrest warrant issued by the
Russian Federation.
According to the information
received, Mr. Mayorov and another Russian national, Mr. Nikolay Sharov, were
arrested in 2011, subjected to torture in order to obtain a confession but
ultimately acquitted by a jury in 2013. However, in 2015 Mr. Sharov was
rearrested and sentenced to 22 years in prison on the same charges. The Russian
authorities then issued an international arrest warrant against Mr. Mayorov,
who had been living legally in Poland since early 2015.
On September 19, 2018 the NGO
Committee Against Torture lodged an application against Russia before the
European Court of Human Rights on behalf of Mr. Sharov, alleging, among others,
violations of Articles 3 (prohibition of torture) and 6 (fair trial) of the
European Convention on Human Rights. 
On 30 September 2018 Mr. Mayorov requested
the Ministry
of Internal Affairs of Slovenia, on the basis of the International Protection
Act (ZMZ-1), to provide him with protection in connection with the fact that extradition
to Russia would expose him to a real risk of torture, false imprisonment and
unfair trial in Russia.
Today the NGO Committee Against
Torture lodged an application against Slovenia before the European Court of
Human Rights on behalf of Mr. Mayorov, along with a request for the indication
of interim measures under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, alleging that his
extradition to Russia will expose him to a real risk of torture and unfair
criminal proceedings in violation of Articles 3 and 6 of the European
Convention on Human Rights.
Copies of the above applications to
the European Court of Human Rights, as well as documentary evidence of the
above violations can be provided to your government by the NGO Committee
Against Torture. 
International human rights bodies
have repeatedly criticised Russia in the past for failing to address
allegations of torture and the use of evidence tainted by torture in criminal
trials. The European Court of Human Rights first condemned Russia in 2006 for the
use of torture in another case (appl. No. 77617/01) represented by the NGO
Committee Against Torture, and has issued more than 120 similar judgments against
Russia since. In August 2018 the UN Committee against Torture was “deeply
concerned at numerous reliable reports of the practice of torture and
ill-treatment in the [Russian Federation], including as a means to extract
confessions.”
The OMCT reiterates that extradition
to a country where a person is exposed to a real risk of torture and unfair
criminal proceedings is prohibited by the European Convention on Human Rights.
Accordingly, the OMCT
respectfully urges the authorities of Slovenia to:
·      
to halt
the extradition of Mr. Mayorov to Russia and
·      
to
allow him to return to Poland in order to provide him with an opportunity to
challenge the international arrest warrant from there. 
In the hope that the concerns
expressed in this letter will receive the attention they deserve, we remain at
your disposal for any further information.Yours sincerely,
  
Gerald Staberock
  
Secretary General
  
OMCT
Copies to:
-       Minister of Justice Ms. Andreja
Katic, Email <gp.mp@gov.si> 