Egypt:  Fear that adoption of new draft NGO Law will endorse a “no human rights” era
October  3, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2016 / OctoberEgypt: Fear that adoption of new draft NGO Law will endorse a “no human rights” eraPR_Egypt_0310162 pages / 152 KB
Paris-Geneva,
October 3, 2016 – With the approval by
the Cabinet of a draft NGO law, authorities are attempting to eradicate
existing human rights groups and preventing the set-up of new ones thus
virtually banning the conduct of human rights work by independent civil society
groups, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (an
FIDH-OMCT partnership) said today. As the State Council has now been referred
the draft for legal review, human rights groups in Egypt continue to face
intensive judicial harassment, aimed at eradicating the human rights movement
as a whole. 
On September
8, 2016, the Cabinet approved a new draft NGO law, which if adopted in its
current form will further shrink the space for civil society in Egypt. The
draft law retains restrictive provisions already existing in the current NGO
Law (No. 84/2002), in particular giving the Ministry of Social Solidarity
authority to approve or reject NGOs’ licensing. It also provides for new
impediments likely to result in the suppression of independent human rights
work by civil society. It establishes a security/governmental committee called
the Coordinating Committee, which would include General Intelligence Services
(GIS) and representatives of the Interior Ministry, to approve foreign funding
of Egyptian NGOs, to give international NGOs (INGOs) licenses to work and to
approve the opening by Egyptian NGOS of new branches nationally and abroad.
The draft
law also limits NGO work to “development and social objectives”, leaving great
uncertainty as to the legality of the conduct of human rights work. In
addition, the draft law imposes a hefty minimum capital to set up an NGO,
establishes a specific tax for foreign funding, bans activists who have
received prison sentence from forming their own NGOs, requires INGOs to conduct
work that meet social needs and conform to State development plans, subjects
the opening of new offices in the country to the Ministry of Social
Solidarity’s approval and deprives individuals from any right to remedy.
“Hindering
the legitimate activities of civil society groups is contrary to international
human rights standards, in particular freedoms of expression and association by
which Egypt is bound”, said FIDH President, Dimitris
Christopoulos.
The approval
of this restrictive NGO draft law is in line with the ongoing tremendous
deterioration of the working environment for civil society in Egypt, especially
within the framework of criminal case No. 173, known as “the foreign funding
case”, which has seen the constant harassment of a significant number of
Egyptian human rights groups and their members since June 2013. Within this
case, on September 17, 2016, the Cairo Criminal Court handed down an order to
freeze the assets of five prominent human rights defenders and three NGOs[1] and at least seven travel bans have also been imposed on
leading Egyptian human rights defenders since 2015. If indicted under
this case, hundreds of Egyptian human rights defenders could be condemned to up
to 25 years in prison, and  at least 37 NGOs will also be closed. 
“Whether
it is the implementation of restrictive legislation or judicial harassment
against NGOs or individual defenders, the Egyptian authorities must immediately
cease their crusade against civil society and enable them to effectively
function”, added OMCT Secretary General, Gerald
Staberock.
Since late
2011, civil society in Egypt has been the target of a crackdown, with
authorities tightening their control on human rights activities in the country.
The recent draft NGO law, along with the decision of the Egyptian Court on case
No. 173 are only the latest attempts by Egyptian authorities to silence human rights
activism in the country, specifically against civil society groups exposing
state abuses. 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
For more
information, please contact:
• FIDH: Audrey Couprie / Arthur
Manet: + 33 143552518
• OMCT: Chiara Cosentino: +41 228094937



[1]      See the Observatory Urgent Appeal EGY 004
/ 0615 / OBS 049.7, published on September 19, 2016.
In June 2016, another judge had already frozen the assets of another
rights NGO, Andalus Center for Tolerance and Anti-Violence Studies (AITAS) and
its director, Ahmad Samih in the context of the same criminal case. 