Thailand:  New lawsuits brought by Thammakaset Company Limited against human rights defenders
February 14, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2019 / FebruaryThailand: New lawsuits brought by Thammakaset Company Limited against human rights defendersFebruary
14, 2019Prime
Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha Office
of the Permanent Secretary, Prime Minister’s OfficeRoyal
Thai GovernmentGovernment
House1
Pitsanulok RoadDusit,
Bangkok 10300ThailandRE: New Lawsuits Brought by Thammakaset Company Limited Against
Human Rights Defenders Dear
Prime Minister Prayut,The 89
undersigned organizations write to express our deep concern regarding recent spurious
complaints brought by Thammakaset Company Limited against several human rights
defenders in Thailand. We respectfully
urge the Thai government to take immediate action to oppose and seek the
dismissal of cases filed by Thammakaset that run counter to your government’s
proclaimed policy to support business and human rights as well as Thailand’s
interests, legal obligations, and international human rights law commitments. To
date, Thammakaset - a Thai-owned poultry company in Lopburi Province - has
filed no fewer than 13 criminal and civil complaints against a number of human
rights defenders, including former employees. While Thai authorities and courts
have dismissed most of the complaints, some are still pending and, in November
2018, a company representative pledged to bring more complaints. In December
2018, Thai authorities summoned 14 former employees of Thammakaset, all migrant
workers, to acknowledge complaints by the company, alleging that the workers “wrongly
filed a false case with officials and caused damage to another [person or
entity].” Lopburi Province police also called Suthasinee Kaewleklai, the
Thailand Coordinator of the Migrant Workers Rights Network (MWRN) - an advocacy
group that supports migrant rights in Thailand - to report to the police on
January 28, 2019 to discuss a separate complaint by Thammakaset against her. On
the same day, the Lopburi Province police requested information from witnesses as
part of an investigation into complaints brought by Thammakaset at the end of
2018 against six individuals relating to activity on social media.Thammakaset’s
criminal complaints stem from its former 14 employees’ involvement in reporting
labor rights abuses to the Department of Labor Protection and Welfare (DLPW)
and the National Human Rights Commission of Thailand (NHRCT) in 2016. In
separate investigations, both DLPW and the NHRCT found evidence of labor rights
abuses, including that Thammakaset failed to pay minimum and overtime wages and
failed to provide adequate leave to workers as required by law. On January 15,
2019, the Supreme Court upheld a lower court’s order requiring Thammakaset to
pay 1.7 million Thai Baht (US$51,470) in compensation to the 14 former
employees for violations of Thailand’s Labor Protection Act.Thammakaset
recently brought additional legal complaints against human rights defenders
involved in publicly reporting on labor rights abuses and employer reprisals
against the workers. As of October 2018, Nan Win, a former Thammakaset
employee, faces new criminal defamation charges for
speaking out on the alleged labor abuses and reprisals against the 14 former
employees in
a film
produced by the human rights organization Fortify Rights and
during a
Facebook-live press conference that Fortify Rights organized. Sutharee
Wannasiri, a former human rights specialist with Fortify Rights, also faces
criminal and civil defamation charges for sharing Fortify Rights’ film on
social media. The Bangkok Criminal Court is scheduled to consider the
complaints against Nan Win and Sutharee Wannasiri on February 4 and March 11, 2019,
respectively, and the Civil Court scheduled hearings in August 2019 to consider
the civil complaint against Sutharee Wannasiri. We
are alarmed that Thai authorities are proceeding to investigate and prosecute these
complaints by Thammakaset, particularly after the Don Mueang Sub-District Court
has already dismissed similar criminal defamation charges in July 2018 brought
by the company against the same 14 former employees. These new charges filed by
Thammakaset constitute harassment by the company that waste valuable time and
resources of police, prosecutors, and judicial officers.The
complaints by Thammakaset appear to be reprisals brought to harass human rights
defenders involved in exposing abuses. Such reprisals interfere with the work
of human rights defenders and prevent the implementation of labor rights
protections. The cases brought by Thammakaset are emblematic of Strategic
Litigation against Public Participation (SLAPP) lawsuits. These cases
demonstrate the dangers SLAPP suits pose for workers and human rights defenders
in Thailand and illustrate the need for your government to adopt clear policies
and enact regulations and laws to oppose such cases from proceeding. Thammakaset
has a long history of aggressively using the courts to intimidate and silence
human rights defenders, who have exposed business-related human rights abuses. In
August and October 2017, Thammakaset filed criminal suits against two migrant
workers and Suthasinee Kaewleklai for the alleged theft of employment timecards.
In fact, the timecards were presented to Thai government labor inspectors as
evidence of labor violations, assisting officials to perform their duty as
required by law. Although Thai courts eventually dismissed Thammakaset’s
complaints, the cases should never have proceeded in the first place and resulted
in undue stress, unnecessary legal costs, and lost time and wages for those
facing charges.We
recognize recent legislative steps by the National Legislative Assembly in
December 2018 to amend Section 161/1 of the Thailand Criminal Procedure Code. This
amendment allows a court to dismiss and forbid the refiling of a complaint by a
private individual if the complaint is filed “in bad faith or with
misrepresentation of facts in order to harass or take advantage of a defendant.”
Section 161/1 should apply to the recent complaints brought by Thammakaset. This
amendment is insufficient to address SLAPP suits generally in Thailand. In
addition to relying on the court’s application of Section 161/1, we urge your
government to clearly demonstrate its opposition to SLAPP lawsuits, such as the
ones filed by Thammakaset. Seeking the expeditious dismissal of the recent
complaints by Thammakaset would be instructive to both foreign and Thai businesses
operating in Thailand and demonstrate your government’s commitment to implementing
the law and upholding business and human rights principles. To
prevent future SLAPP lawsuits like those filed by Thammakaset, we recommend
that Thailand develop comprehensive anti-SLAPP legislation that fully protects
workers, human rights defenders, and others from judicial harassment. It is
also essential that the public prosecutor and the Attorney General’s Office be provided
with adequate resources and support to exercise their powers under Section 21
of the 2010 Public Prosecutor Organ and Public Prosecutors Act to screen out unwarranted
complaints, including those brought to harass, intimidate, or retaliate against
human rights defenders or others.  Thailand should also decriminalize
defamation and end imprisonment or fines as penalties for acts of defamation.We
urge the Thai government to follow the recommendation
provided by a group of six United Nations human rights experts in May 2018 to
“revise its civil and criminal laws as well as prosecution processes to prevent
misuse of defamation legislation by companies.” During its official visit to
Thailand in April 2018, the U.N. Working Group on Business and Human Rights
similarly called on the Thai government to “ensure that defamation cases are
not used by businesses as a tool to undermine legitimate rights and freedoms of
affected rights holders, civil society organizations and human rights
defenders.” The Working Group further recommended “enacting anti-SLAPP
legislation to ensure that human rights defenders are not subjected to civil
liability for their activities.” We encourage the Thai government to
incorporate these recommendations into Thailand’s National Action Plan on
Business and Human Rights and also ensure meaningful consultations with Thai
civil society on developing and implementing the National Action Plan.We
thank you for your attention to the issues and recommendations raised in this
letter. We welcome the opportunity to assist and support the Thai government in
meeting its commitments to uphold business and human rights principles as well
as to protect the rights of workers, human rights defenders, and basic freedoms
in Thailand.Sincerely,
1.     Aksi! for Gender, Social and Ecological Justice, Indonesia2.    
American Federation of Labor and Congress of
Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO)3.     Amnesty International4.     Anti-Slavery International5.     Article 196.     ASEAN Parliamentarians for Human Rights7.    
Asia Pacific Forum on Women, Law and Development8.    
Asia Pacific Mission for Migrants (APMM), Hong Kong9.     Asia Pacific Refugee Rights Network10. Asian Forum for Human Rights and Development
(FORUM-ASIA)11. Assembly of the Poor, Thailand12. Australian Council of Trade Unions13. Building and Wood Workers' International (BWI)14. Bune United Sisters, Tombil Community, Minj , Jiwaka
Province, PNG15. Burma Campaign-UK16. Business & Human Rights Resource Center17. Center for Alliance of Labor and Human Rights
(CENTRAL)18. Center for Trade Union and Human Rights (CTUHR),
Philippines19. Chab Dai20. CIVICUS21. Civil Rights Defenders22. Coalition for the Rights of Refugees and Stateless
Persons23. Community Resource Centre Foundation24. Conservation International25. Cross Cultural Foundation26. Danish Ethical Trading Initiative27. Environmental Justice Foundation28. Ethical Trading Initiative29. Ethical Trading Initiative Denmark30. Ethical Trading Initiative Norway31. FIDH (International Federation for Human Rights),
within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders32. FishWise 33. Fortify Rights34. Foundation for Education and Development35. Free the Slaves36. Freedom Fund37. Freedom United38. Frontline Defenders39. GABRIELA Alliance of Filipino Women, Philippines40. Global Coalition on Migration41. Global Legal Action Network42. Global Migration Policy Associates43. Greenpeace44. Highlands Women Human Right Defenders Movement, PNG45. Human Rights and Development Foundation46. Human Rights Lawyers Association47. Human Rights Now48. Human Rights Watch49. Humanity United Action50. IJM Foundation (มูลนิธิไอเจเอ็ม)51. Indonesian Migrant Workers Union, Indonesia52. International Accountability Project53. International Labor Rights Forum54. Kabar Bumi (Indonesian Migrant Workers Union),
Indonesia55. Korea Center for United Nations Human Rights Policy
(KOCUN), the Republic of Korea56. Kugar Farmers Association, Kudjip, BANZ, Jiwaka
Province, PNG57. LawAid International58. Lawyers' Rights Watch Canada59. Liberty Shared60. Manushya Foundation61. MAP Foundation62. MARUAH, Singapore63. Migrant Workers Rights Network64. National Alliance of Women Human Rights Defenders
(NAWHRD), Nepal65. National Indigenous Women Forum (NIWF), Nepal66. NEthing, India67. North Whagi Country's Women Association, Jiwaka
Province, PNG68. Oxfam69. RITES Forum, India70. Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights71. Rural Women Association Alga, Kyrgyzstan72. Shan Women's Action Network73. Slave Free Seas74. Social Accountability International 75. SRED, India76. Stop the Traffik Australian Coalition77. Suara Perempuan Desa (Rural Women's Voices), Indonesia78. SwedWatch79. Tarangini Foundation, Nepal80. Thai Lawyers for Human Rights81. Trades Union Congress82. Uniting Church of Australia (Synod of Victoria and
Tasmania)83. Verité84. Voice85. Voice for Change, Jiwaka Province, PNG86. Walk Free Foundation87. We Women Sri Lanka, Sri Lanka88. Women's League of Burma
89. World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the
framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders 