Bangladesh:  Joint statement: New proposed legislation to stifle the voice of rights defenders
June 26, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Bangladesh / 2015 / JuneBangladesh: Joint statement: New proposed legislation to stifle the voice of rights defendersBangladesh_Joint_2015.06.26_English1 page / 226 KB​













Paris-Geneva-Dhaka, June 26, 2015 – Authorities in Bangladesh must reject the proposed Cyber Security Act 2015 and the Foreign Donations (Voluntary Activities) Regulation
Act 2014, as they both
violate international human rights standards on freedom of expression and
association, said the Observatory and Odhikar.
 
Bangladesh authorities are aiming to tighten their
control over free expression through the newly proposed Cyber Security Act
2015. This Act, which is currently awaiting approval by the Cabinet, widens the
scope of crimes and imposes harsher sentences than the existing Information and
Communication (ICT) Act. It also grants the authorities the right to prosecute
any person, including foreigners, who threatens Bangladesh’s “national
security” through online communications. The existing ICT Act already
criminalises defamatory and “anti-State” publications and has been used to
target dissenting voices, in particular human rights defenders, and this
repression would only increase in scope and severity with the newly proposed
legislation.
 
The proposed Cyber Security Act is part of a systemic
approach by the Bangladesh authorities to stifle free expression and severely
restrict the work of civil society. The Foreign
Donations (Voluntary Activities) Regulation Act 2014, which was already
approved by the Cabinet in 2014 and is currently before the Parliament in order to be passed
into law, subjects the work of civil society organizations to increasing
control by the government. According to this Act, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) will not be allowed to receive any foreign donations
without prior permission from the NGO Affairs Bureau (NGO-AB), and will need to
inform the NGO-AB of any activities they undertake with such funds. The NGO-AB,
which is under the direct supervision of the Prime Minister’s Office, has the
authority to inspect, monitor and suspend the activities of NGOs that receive
foreign funding, with no appeal or independent review mechanism.
 
“These proposed legislative reforms will result in
greater repression of free expression and the ability of human rights defenders
to work safely, freely and effectively in Bangladesh”, said Karim Lahidji, President of FIDH. The right of
every individual to freedom of association and expression is a fundamental and
universal right enshrined in numerous international treaties and standards,
particularly Article 22 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, which Bangladesh has ratified.
 
“We call on the authorities in Bangladesh to
immediately reject these two proposed acts, and ensure that legislation in
Bangladesh is in line with international law and protects fundamental freedoms
and human rights”,
stated Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of OMCT
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The objective
of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy to situations of
repression against human rights defenders.
 
For more information, please contact:
ñ  FIDH: Arthur Manet / Lucie Kroening: +33 1 43 55 25 18
ñ  OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: Tel: +41 22 809 49 24
ñ  Odhikar: ASM Nasiruddin Elan, Director:
odhikar.bd@gmail.com 