Malaysia:  Threats  and judicial harassment of Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah and several organisers of Bersih 5 rally
November 15, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Malaysia / 2016 / NovemberMalaysia: Threats  and judicial harassment of Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah and several organisers of Bersih 5 rally

MYS 001 /
1116 / OBS 096
Death
threats / 
Arbitrary
arrest / Release / Judicial harassment / 
Obstacles to
freedom of assembly 
Malaysia
November 15,
2016
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership
of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, requests your
urgent intervention in the following situation in Malaysia.
 
Brief
description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable
sources about renewed threats against, and judicial harassment of, Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah, Chairperson of Bersih 2.0[1], and against several members organisers of the
upcoming Bersih 5 rally.
 
According to the information received, on
November 11, 2016, Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah received photoshopped images of
herself, her three sons, Bersih Secretariat Manager Mr. Mandeep Singh, and
former Co-Chair of Bersih Ms. Ambiga Sreenevasan, being beheaded by ISIS on her
mobile phone. She subsequently lodged a police report on the incident.
 
Over the past few weeks, Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah has received a number of
death threats. On October 17, 2016, she received violent messages on her mobile
phone that threatened her, her sons, Mr. Mandeep Singh and Ms. Ambiga
Sreenevasan, and warned her of reprisals if she proceeded with organising the
November 19 Bersih 5 rally.[2]
The messages claimed to be from the ‘Islamic State Malaysia’.
 
Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah has also been subjected to harassment by the
authorities. On October 29, 2016, she was arbitrarily arrested under Article 11
of the 1984 Printing Presses and Publications Act for distributing Bersih 5
leaflets in Kota Marudu, Sabah State. She was brought to Kota Marudu district
police headquarters for questioning and subsequently released on bail. Several
other individuals have also been threatened with arrest under the 1984 Printing
Presses and Publications Act and the 1948 Sedition Act for distributing the
same leaflets.
 
On November 4, 2016, she was briefly detained for questioning at the
Bukit Aman police headquarters over allegations that Bersih 2.0 received
foreign funding, which the police claimed was in violation of Article 124C of
the Criminal Code (‘attempt to commit activity detrimental to parliamentary
democracy’)[3].
She was released on the same day pending further investigations. During
questioning, the police officers told her that she would be summoned after the
November 19 rally.
 
Moreover, on November 3, 2016, Home Affairs Minister Ahmad Zahid Hamidi
warned Bersih 5 organisers that they would face legal action if the rally went
ahead. Mr. Zahid claimed Bersih 5 did not comply with the 2012 Peaceful
Assembly Act because the rally venue was among the locations prohibited by the
Act. Bersih 5 organisers maintain that the planned
November 19 rally complies with the legal requirements under the 2012 Peaceful
Assembly Act, including the requirement to notify the authorities 10 days
before the demonstration.
 
In that context, other Bersih 2.0 members have been threatened several
times. In October 2016, a number of local Bersih 2.0 coordinators were summoned
by the police for questioning in the States of Johor, Penang, Selangor, Negeri
Sembilan, and Perak, over a Bersih 5 convoy, which travelled from Melaka to
Negeri Sembilan from October 6 to 8, 2016.
 
Bersih members also regularly receive threats from the pro-government
‘red shirts.’ On October 8, 2016, participants of a Bersih 5 convoy were
attacked with eggs and firecrackers, and physically assaulted. ‘Red shirt’
leader Jamal Yunos has said that they would continue to gather, legally or
illegally, and use physical force against Bersih 5 participants. 
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the above-mentioned threats and acts of
harassment against Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah, Mr.
Mandeep Singh, Ms. Ambiga Sreenevasan, as well as other members of Bersih 2.0,
which only aim at preventing them from exercising their legitimate human rights
activities, especially their right to freedom of peaceful assembly.
 
Moreover, the Observatory urges
the authorities to drop the unlawful ban on Bersih 5. 
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Malaysia asking
them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah, Mr. Mandeep
Singh, and Ms. Ambiga Sreenevasan as well as of other members of
Bersih 2.0, their relatives and of all human rights defenders in Malaysia;
 
ii. Put an end to all forms of harassment,
including at the judicial level, against Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah, Mr. Mandeep
Singh, and Ms. Ambiga Sreenevasan as well as of other members
of Bersih 2.0 and of all human rights defenders in the country so that they are
able to carry out their work without hindrance;
 
iii. Undertake a thorough, impartial, and
transparent criminal investigation into the death threats and assault against
Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah, Mr. Mandeep Singh, and Ms. Ambiga Sreenevasan, in order to identify those
responsible, bring them before a competent and impartial tribunal, and apply to
them the sanctions provided by the law;
 
iv. Ensure in all circumstances that all human
rights defenders in Malaysia are able to carry out their legitimate human
rights activities including the organisation of peaceful and unarmed assemblies
without any hindrance or fear of violence;
 
v. Comply with all the provisions of the United
Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General
Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular with its Articles 1, 5(a), and
12.2;
 
vi. Guarantee the respect of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and other international human rights instruments signed or ratified by
Malaysia.
 
Addresses:
 
·      
Dato’ Sri Mohd Najib bin Tun Abdul Razak, Prime Minister of Malaysia,
Fax: +60 3 8888 3444, Email: ppm@pmo.gov.my
·      
Mr. Ahmad Zahid Hamidi, Minister of Home Affairs of Malaysia, Fax: +60 3
8889 1613 / +60 3 8889 1610, Email: webmaster@moha.gov.my
·      
Tan Sri Razali Bin Ismail, Chairman of the Human
Rights Commission of Malaysia (SUHAKAM), ax: +60 3 2612 5620, Email:
humanrights@suhakam.org.my; hasmyagam@suhakam.org.my
·      
H.E. Mr. Amran Mohamed Zin, Ambassador, Permanent Representative of
Malaysia to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 710 75 01,
Email: malgeneva@kln.gov.my
·      
Embassy of Malaysia in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 762 50 49, Email:
malbrussels@kln.gov.my
 
Please also write to the diplomatic representations
of Malaysia in your respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, November 15, 2016
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting
the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The objective of this programme is to prevent
or remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and
OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights
Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.



[1] The Coalition for Clean and Fair
Elections (Bersih) is a
non-partisan, civil society campaign created in 2006 and endorsed by over 60 Malaysian
non-governmental organisations, which seeks to reform the
electoral system in Malaysia to ensure free, clean, and fair elections and to
promote the respect of democratic rights.


[2] The Bersih 5 has been organised in
response to a corruption scandal involving about US$1 billion in State assets
connected to Prime Minister Najib Razak. For more information see: http://www.bersih.org/ 


[3] Article 124C of the Malaysian
Criminal Code states that “Whoever attempts to commit an activity detrimental
to parliamentary democracy or does any act preparatory thereto shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 15 years.” 