Libya:  OMCT and HRS call on the international community to urge Libya to put an end to the violent repression of peaceful demonstrations.
February 28, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Statements / Libya / 2011 / FebruaryLibya: OMCT and HRS call on the international community to urge Libya to put an end to the violent repression of peaceful demonstrations.
PUBLIC
STATEMENT
 
LIBYA:
OMCT and HRS call on the international community to urge Libya
to put an end to the violent repression of
peaceful demonstrations
 
Geneva,
22 February 2011. The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and
Human Rights Solidarity (HRS) condemn
the unlawful killings of protesters by Libyan security forces amidst
protests calling for change that have started on 15 February 2011
and urge the Libyan authorities to immediately
cease the violent repression. 

 
OMCT
and HRS are gravely concerned about reports of mass killings of
protesters by security forces supported by foreign mercenaries, and
special security battalions using live ammunition, including machine
gun fire and large-calibre weapons, in Benghazi and
other cities. According to information received, at least 200 people
have been killed and many injured in Benghazi but
the exact situation in the country remains difficult to asses given
the fact that the authorities have restricted internet communication
and freedom of the press. 

 
In
light of the aforementioned events, OMCT and HRS support the call of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights for an independent
international investigation into these events. 

 
OMCT
and HRS further call on the UN Human Rights Council to hold a special
session on the current human rights violations in Libya
as a matter of urgent
concern. The Council has to live up to its own mandate by responding
promptly to human rights emergencies. 

 
OMCT
and HRS also call on all States that have relations with Libya
to urge the Libyan
authorities to immediately put an end to the unlawful killings of
protesters and the excessive use of force. 

 
Finally,
OMCT and HRS call on the Libyan
authorities to 

 
Immediately
	put an end to the violent repression of the peaceful protests and
	issue clear instructions to the security forces to refrain from
	using excessive force against the protesters in accordance with
	international
	standards, including the Basic Principles on the Use of Force and
	Firearms and the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials;
	

Guarantee
	freedom of peaceful assembly and freedom of expression; 

Carry
	out prompt, effective,
	thorough, independent and impartial investigations
into
	the security forces abuses and violence, including the unlawful
	killings, the results of which must be made public, in order to
	bring
	those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial
	tribunal and to apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions
	as provided by law; and provide
	the victims with
	adequate compensation, reparation and rehabilitation;


Ensure
	the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the
	country in accordance with national laws and international human
	rights standards. 


 
 
Contact:


Eric
Sottas, World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT): +41 22 809 49 39
Khaled
Saleh, Human Rights Solidarity (HRS): +41 76 570 19 63 