Congo, Democratic Republic:  Unrest, arrests and killings in DR Congo: Stop EU support for Congolese police
December 22, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Urgent Interventions / Congo, Democratic Republic / 2016 / DecemberCongo, Democratic Republic: Unrest, arrests and killings in DR Congo: Stop EU support for Congolese policeDRC_Joint_2212162 pages / 86 KBBrussels, 22 December 2016 - After
days of political turmoil in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), 
the European Union (EU) must take stronger and more concrete action by 
stopping its financial support
for the police sector, the European network for Central Africa (EurAc) 
and World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) declared today.
 The violent and deadly current turmoil in the DRC is 
no surprise to observers. In the last months and weeks, EurAc and OMCT 
have issued repeated warnings 
about the risk of seeing the pre-electoral situation deteriorate into a
further escalation of violence and repression. Despite recent 
significant efforts of the EU to apply sanctions against seven top 
security officials, the current situation in Kinshasa and
in other main cities of the country is extremely worrying: according to
various reliable sources,
security forces have shot dead at least 34 protesters since Monday 19 December. Since last week, the United Nations has documented “113
arrests in the country, including opposition leaders and sympathizers, 
civil society activists and human rights defenders, media professionals 
and other individuals”. Youth and pro-democracy movement activists from 
Lucha were arrested in Goma on 21 December
and access to social media, such as Twitter, WhatsApp and Facebook, is 
still largely down after being cut last Sunday.
 The undersigned organisations acknowledge that a few 
EU Member States reacted publicly to the recent developments, denouncing
the violence and expressing their deep concern. For instance, France 
is considering now
the possibility for the EU to apply additional sanctions against the DRC. Germany declared that
it has canceled further development aid talks “until further notice”.
 Following these recent declarations, we call on the 
EU to increase the pressure on the Congolese regime in order for the 
violent repression to stop and for a political compromise to be found. 
We therefore urge EU leaders to:
 -        Extend
targeted sanctions against the main police and intelligence officials 
and against the Justice and Communication and Medias ministers

After days of renewed violence and abuse, we urge the EU to extend the individual sanctions to other senior officials responsible for organising the repression, namely the head of National Congolese Police (Police Nationale Congolaise -
PNC) Charles Bisengimana, the head of the intelligence services (Agence Nationale de Renseignements -
ANR) Kalev Mutond, as well as the Justice Minister Alexis 
Thambwe-Mwamba and Communications and Medias Minister Lambert Mende. The
latter is responsible
for the blocking and jamming of the signals of national and 
international radio stations and the blocking of social media;
 -        Stop EU financial support for Congolese police

Our organisations deem it irresponsible for the EU co-operation to continue funding the Congolese police. Due to the clear
and reliable evidence of political
repression and human rights violations involving Congolese security 
service agents (ANR, PNC, Presidential Guard), we urge the EU to 
immediately stop its financial support through
the Support Programme for Reform of the Police in the DRC (Programmes d’Appui à la Réforme de la Police en RDC - PARP), funded as part of the 11th European Development Fund (EDF).

Without rapid, significant and satisfactory progress 
on the political stalemate and the human rights situation, we call on 
the EU to immediately trigger the mechanisms for enhanced political dialogue provided for in the Cotonou Agreement (enhanced
Article 8 and consultations under Article 96), with the possibility
of a suspension of all aid programmes, except for humanitarian and 
emergency actions in direct support of the population or support to 
political transition and a way out of the crisis;

 

-        Provide greater support and protection for civil society and human rights defenders

Civil society organizations and youth movements such as Lutte pour le Changement (Lucha), Filimbi and
many other movements play a crucial and key role in DRC, working 
towards the defense and promotion of human rights and democracy
and for the rule of law, representing the pillar of pluralistic 
society, often risking their lives. Supporting and protecting these 
critical voices should be a priority for the EU today. Therefore, we 
call on the EU, also through the EU Delegation, to publicly
condemn the violations occurring in DRC and work more closely with 
Congolese civil society publicly supporting its legitimate human rights 
work, in accordance with the EU Human Rights Defenders Guidelines. Moreover, we urge the EU to provide enhanced
flexible and direct financial support as well as the possibility of issuing emergency visas to
those human rights defenders and organisations at risk in order to help
guarantee in all circumstances their physical and psychological 
integrity.
 -        Encourage the UN peacekeeping mission in Congo (MONUSCO) to comply with its obligations

The EU must encourage MONUSCO to comply with its 
obligations enshrined in the UN Security Council Resolution 2277, 
especially Article 29 (b), to ensure and contribute as a priority to the
“stabilization […] through support to the creation
of an environment conducive to peaceful, credible and timely elections 
reducing the risk of instability, including open political space, and 
promotion and protection of human rights” and Article 36 I (a) to 
“ensure, within its area of operations, effective
protection of civilians under threat of physical violence, including by
deterring, preventing and stopping armed groups from inflicting 
violence on the populations, paying particular attention to (…) human 
rights defenders, with a focus on violence emerging
(…) in the context of elections”.

For media inquiry and/or more information please contact:In Brussels - For EurAc, Julie Capoulade (English, French, Spanish), julie.capoulade@eurac-network.org;
Tel: +32 2 725 47 70 / +32 499 81 01 77

In Brussels - For the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), Chiara Cosentino (English, Spanish, French), cc@omct.org ;
Tel: +32 2 218 37 19 / +41 22 809 49 3 