Greece:  Attacks to freedom of assembly, threats and harassment against minority rights defenders by the Golden Dawn far-right party
January  6, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Greece / 2017 / JanuaryGreece: Attacks to freedom of assembly, threats and harassment against minority rights defenders by the Golden Dawn far-right partyCASE GRE 060117HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Restrictions to freedom of association /
Harassment / Death threats

The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your urgent intervention in the
following situation in Greece.
Description
of the situation:

The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by reliable sources
about the ongoing harassment of human rights defenders dealing with minority
rights in Greece. 
According to the information received, on December 12, 2016 six parliamentarians
belonging to the Greek far-right party Golden Dawn and some of their followers
violently interrupted a Human Rights Day conference organised in the Athens Journalist
Union building by the Greek Helsinki
Monitor (GHM), along with the Party of Friendship Equality and Peace (Dostluk
Esitlik Baris - DEB)[1],
on the topic of “National Minorities in Greece and Recommendations from
International Organisations”. 
During the attack, the six Golden Dawn members and their followers entered
the room shouting racist slogans and threatening the participants. Verbal
abuses, death threats against the participants, particularly against DEB Party
President Mustafa Ali Cavus, and slogans such as “Turks are unwelcomed in Greece”
have been heard during this incident.
In spite of the warning received prior to the event and their written promises
to GHM to ensure the smooth running of the conference, the Greek police did not
take any measure to protect the integrity of the participants nor to ensure
their freedom of speech and association. 
Moreover, the Greek Prosecution Offices did not take any ex officio
action following this violent and threatening action by Golden Dawn members of
the Parliament (MPs) and the failure of police to take any action. On December
21, 2016, GHM and DEB filed a complaint before the Athens Prosecutor for Racist Crimes against both the Golden Dawn MPs and the
Hellenic Police leadership.
The International Secretariat of OMCT recalls that the situation of
minority rights defenders in Greece has been critical for years. Human rights
defenders dealing with this matter have been subjected to expulsions, entry
bans and other forms of administrative harassment and threats[2].
The International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its deep concern for the
overall situation of minority rights defenders in Greece, as evident in the
incident reported above, and urges the Greek authorities to put in place all
necessary measures to ensure their physical and psychological integrity as well
as to protect their right to freedom of expression and association in order to
be able to carry out their legitimate human rights work. 
Finally, the International Secretariat of OMCT urges the Greek
authorities to promptly and effectively investigate the complaint related to
the events of December 12, 2016 and bring those responsible to justice.
Actions requested:

Please write to the authorities of Greece asking them to:
i.          Put an end to all acts
of harassment against all minority rights defenders in Greece;
ii.         Put in place all necessary measures to
guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of
minority rights defenders in Greece;
iii.        Carry
out an immediate, thorough, impartial, and transparent investigation into the events
described above in order to identify all those responsible, and sanction them
as provided by the law;
iv.        Conform with the
provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the
General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially Articles
1 and 12.2; and
v.         More generally, ensure in
all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with
international and regional human rights instruments ratified by Greece.

Addresses:
·   Prime Minister of Greece, Mr.
Alexis Tsipras, Email: mail@primeminister.gr
·    Minister of
Justice Mr. Stavros Kontonis Email:  grammateia@justice.gov.gr
·    Alternate Minister for Citizens
Protection of Greece, Mr. Nikolaos Toskas, Fax: +30 210 692 9764, Email: minister@mopocp.gov.gr
.   General Secretary for Transparency and Human
Rights, Ms. Maria Yannakaki, Fax: Email: ggdad@justice.gov.gr
·    Deputy Permanent Representative of
Greece, Mr. Ioannis Tsaousis, First Counsellor, Permanent Mission of Greece to
the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 732 21 50; Email: grdel.gva@mfa.gr
·    Ambassador of Greece, H.E. Eleftheria
Galathianaki, Embassy of Greece in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: (+32) 2 545 5585,
Email: gremb.bru@mfa.gr
·    Permanent Representative of Greece, H.E.
Papastavrou Andreas, Permanent Representation to the European Union (EU), Fax:
+32 2 5515651, 5127912
Email: mea.bruxelles@rp-greece.be
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Greece in your respective
country.
***
Geneva,
January 6, 2017
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.



[1] The Party Friendship Equality and Peace is a Greek political party
founded in 1991 to represent the interest of the Turkish minority in Greece. 


[2] See OMCT Urgent Appeal GRE 261016 issued on October 26, 2016 and
OMCT Urgent Appeal GRE 181116 issued on November 18, 2016. 