Bangladesh:  Enforced disappearance of Mr. Delwar Hossain_Fear for his safety
October 13, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2011 / OctoberBangladesh: Enforced disappearance of Mr. Delwar Hossain_Fear for his safety​Case BGD 131011Enforced
disappearance/ Fear for the safety 
 
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Bangladesh.

 
Brief description of the situation
 
The
International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by ODHIKAR, a member of
OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the alleged enforced disappearance, since 23
 June 2011,
of Mr. Delwar Hossain, a 30-year–old salesman from
Kolatola, Ward 3 of Shantinogor in Madaripur municipality. It is reported that
he disappeared after he was forcibly taken by Rapid Action Batalion (RAB)
members. OMCT is gravely concerned because, to
date, the whereabouts of Mr. Delwar Hossain remain unknown.
 
According
to the information received, on 23 June 2011 at around 9.30 pm, several individuals, who
identified themselves with RAB identity cards, blindfolded Mr. Delwar Hossain and
forced him into a microbus from the boat terminal of Gachbaria market at
Mostofapur, in Shodor Upazilla and took him to an unknown destination.
Witnesses at the scene approached the alleged RAB members and asked for the
reason of their action but, after being showed the RAB identity cards, they
refrained from interfering in the situation. 
 
According
to the same information, Mr. Delwar Hossain’s wife was informed by an
acquaintance about the abduction and went, on the next day, 24
 June 2011,
to the Madaripur Police Station to file a General Diary (GD). However, the
police officer reportedly refused to register it. She subsequently went to the
Madaripur RAB head office but, there, the RAB members denied having arrested Mr.
Delwar Hossain. Mr. Delwar Hossain’s sister also went to the Madaripur RAB head
office after learning about the incident from local people. She was reportedly
not allowed to enter the office, and she was told by the RAB member guarding
the main door that nobody named Delwar Hossain had been arrested. On 25
 September 2011, Mr. Delwar Hossain’s wife returned to the police in order to file a
complaint but she was again turned away.
 
According
to two Sub inspectors at Madaripur Police Station contacted by ODHIKAR during
its fact-finding mission, Mr. Delwar Hossain was also known as “Dyata Dacoit” and
a warrant had been issued under that name in connection with criminal cases
committed in different areas. However, no further information was provided about
whether Mr. Delwar Hossain was indeed arrested under the aforementioned
warrant. One of the Sub inspectors also told ODHIKAR that, after Mr. Delwar Hossain’s
wife came to the police in June, he went to the spot to inquire but he found no
evidence of the abduction by RAB members. The OMCT is gravely concerned that,
to date, no effective investigation was carried out into the disappearance of
Mr. Delwar Hossain by the competent authorities, all the more since the police
refused to register a GD (a precondition to launch a thorough investigation by
the police, including by informing other police stations). 
 
The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned
about the safety of Mr. Delwar Hossain and fears that he was
victim of an extra-judicial killing. OMCT
recalls that the authorities in Bangladesh have to fulfil their obligations
under international human rights law to protect the right to life and the right
not to be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment. 
 
OMCT calls on the competent authorities to ensure that an investigation into
the enforced disappearence of Mr. Delwar
Hossain is
carried out promptly, effectively, thoroughly, independently and impartially, in accordance with international human rights
standards, the result of which must be made public, in order to bring those
responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply
penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law. 
Action requested
Please
write to the authorities in Bangladesh urging them to:
 
i.                    
Immediately
locate and disclose the whereabouts of Mr. Delwar
Hossain; 
ii.                  
Guarantee, in all circumstances, the
physical and psychological integrity of Mr.
Delwar Hossain; 
iii.                 
Grant Mr. Delwar Hossain prompt and unrestricted access
to a lawyer of his choice and his family, as well as guarantee that he is
examined by an independent doctor and receives adequate medical care, in
accordance, inter alia, the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of
Prisoners;
iv.                
Order his
immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent
with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring him
before an impartial, independent and competent tribunal and guarantee his
procedural rights at all times;
v.                  
Carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the enforced disappearence
of Mr. Delwar Hossain,
in accordance with international human rights standards, the result of which
must be made public, in order to bring those responsible before a competent,
independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative
sanctions as provided by law;
vi.                
Ensure
that an effective remedy, including the right to full redress with compensation
be granted to the victim concerned;
vii.               
Ensure
the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.

 
Addresses
 

Ø      Ms. Sheikh
Hasina, Prime
Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, Gona Bhaban, Old Sangsad
Bhaban, Tejgaon, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Fax: + 880 2 8113243 Email: info@pmo.gov.bd ; pm@pmo.gov.bd
Ø      Ms. Sahara Khatun, Ministry
of Home Affairs, Bangladesh
Secretariat Building 4, Dhaka, Bangladesh Fax: +880 2
7169667 or +880 2 717 1611 Email: minister@mha.gov.bd
Ø      Mr. Shafiq Ahmed, Ministry
of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs,  Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Fax:
+880 2 7168557 Email: minoflaw@bdonline.com
, info@minlaw.gov.bd
Ø      Dr. Dipu Moni, Ministry
of Foreign Affairs, Honorable Minister, Dr. Dipu
Moni, Fax: + 880 2 9562188, Email:
dirfe@mofa.gov.bd
Ø      Mr. Abdus Sobhan Sikder, Secretary, Ministry
of Home Affairs, Fax: + 880
2 7164788, Email: secretary@mha.gov.bd
Ø     
Professor Dr. Mizanur Rahman, Chairman, National Human Rights
Commission, Gulpheshan Plaza (Level-11), 8, Shahid Sangbadik Selina
Parvin Sarak, Boro Magbazar, Dhaka-1217, Bangladesh. Fax: + 880 2 9137743. E-mail: nhrc.bd@gmail.com
Ø     
Mr. Mahbubey Alam, Attorney General for Bangladesh, Attorney
General's Office, Supreme Court Premises, Dhaka, Bangladesh. Fax: + 880 2 9561568 E-mail: adv_mahbubey@yahoo.com
Ø      Mr. Hasan Mahmud
Khandoker, Inspector
General of Police, Police Headquarters, Phoenix Road, Dhaka-1000,
Bangladesh, Fax:
+880 2 7125840 E-mail: ig@police.gov.bd
Ø      Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh to the United
Nations in Geneva, 65 rue de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 46 16, E-mail: mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.int
 
Please also
write to the embassies of Bangladesh
in your respective country.
***
Geneva,
13 October
 2011
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply. 