Belarus:  Continued harassment of the Human Rights Centre “Viasna”
December 20, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Belarus / 2013 / DecemberBelarus: Continued harassment of the Human Rights Centre “Viasna”

BLR 005 / 1213 / OBS 097
Internet censorship /
Harassment
Belarus
December 20, 2013
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Belarus.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed of the continued harassment of the Belarusian
Human Rights Centre “Viasna”.
 
According
to the information received, on December 16, 2013, Mr. Valiantsin Stefanovich,
Deputy Chairman of the Human Rights Center “Viasna”, was informed by the
Prosecutor General’s Office of Belarus, that Viasna's website www.spring96.org had been introduced
into the list of resources with restricted access by decision of the same in
August 2011 on the grounds that “actions on behalf of the human rights
organisation 'Viasna', that has not passed the established procedures of state
registration, are contrary to the legislation of the Republic of Belarus”.
The decision was based on Article 193.1 of the Criminal Code, which prohibits
organising or participating in the activities of unregistered organisations. 
 
According
to the information received, other websites on the list include those dealing
with pornography, promoting extremist activities or violating copyrights, and
five opposition or critical minded websites. Those sites have the access
blocked from the State, education and cultural institutions.
 
Until
December 16, 2013, authorities had refused to disclose to Viasna the maker or
the basis of the decision to restrict public access to its website. Viasna had
contacted the Operative Analytical Centre (an agency under the authority of the
President of the Republic of Belarus), the Republican Unitary Enterprise for
Oversight of Telecommunications, and the Ministry of Communications and
Information. Each body had either declined to give any information, referred
Viasna elsewhere or advised it to contact all other agencies with the authority
to restrict access to a website. It was not until Viasna had contacted all the
agencies empowered to issue such a decision that it received a response from
the office of the Prosecutor General, disclosing that they had made the
decision and their above reason for doing so.
 
The
Observatory recalls that in August 2007 the United Nations Human Rights
Committee declared that the November 2003 decision of the Supreme Court of the
Republic of Belarus to dissolve Viasna is a violation of the right to freedom
of association and called on authorities in Belarus to re-register and
compensate Viasna in accordance with their obligations under the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The Government of Belarus is yet to
comply with the recommendation. Furthermore, it has refused several requests by
Viasna and many other organisations to be registered.
 
The
Observatory also notes that Article 5 of the Constitution of the Republic of
Belarus provides for grounds for the restriction of the activities of
associations - aiming to change the constitutional order or advocating war,
social, national, religious and racial hatred. Unarguably, the activities of
Viasna do not fall into any of these categories.
 
The Observatory
expresses its concern about the decision of the Government of Belarus to censor
Viasna's website, and considers it a means to curtail its human rights
activities. Furthermore, the mention of Article 193.1 of the Criminal Code in
the General Prosecutor's answer to their request amounts to a form of
intimidation against Viasna, which has been continuing its legitimate and
peaceful activities despite a constant pressure. The Observatory has repeatedly
qualified Article 193.1, which penalises acting on behalf of an unregistered
organisation, as a provision violating both the Constitution and international
human rights law. The Council of Europe Venice Commission concluded in October
2011 that Article 193.1 of Belarus’ Criminal Code, violates the provisions of
international law. According to the Venice Commission, freedoms of association
and expression are of vital importance in any democratic country, and any
restrictions on them should be well justified.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please
write to the Belarusian authorities, urging them to:
 
i. Put an end to any
censorship - including print, audio, televisual and online - of Viasna's
communication materials, as well as of all other human rights defenders in
Belarus;
 
ii. Remove all restrictions on Viasna's website
immediately and unconditionally since this restriction is arbitrary as it only
aims at curtailing Viasna's human rights activities by reducing its online
presence and discrediting its existence and work by grouping it together with
publishers of pornography and extremists;
 
iii. Repeal Article 193.1 of the Criminal Code of the
Republic of Belarus;
 
iv. Put an end to any kind of harassment -
including at the judicial level - against all human rights defenders in Belarus and
ensure in all circumstances that they are able to carry out their work without
unjustified hindrances;
 
v. More generally, conform
with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by
the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially:
- its Article 1, which states that “everyone has
the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to
strive for the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental
freedoms at the national and international levels”,
- its Article 6 (b) and (c), which states that
“Everyone has the right, individually and in association with others […] as
provided for in human rights and other applicable international instruments,
freely to publish, impart or disseminate to others views, information and
knowledge on all human rights and fundamental freedoms and [...] to study,
discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law and in practice,
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through these and other
appropriate means, to draw public attention to those matters”.
- and its Article 12.2, which provides that “the
State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the
competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others,
against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”
;
 
vi. Conform with the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights and the First Protocol thereto, both of which have
been ratified by Belarus; especially Article 22: “Everyone shall have the right
to freedom of association with others, including the right to form and join
trade unions for the protection of his interests.”
 
vii. Ensure in all
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with international human rights standards and international instruments ratified
by the Belarusian Republic.
 
Addresses:

    • President Aliaksandr Lukashenka, vul. Karla Marksa, 38, 220016 Minsk, Belarus, Fax: + 375 172 26 06 10 or + 375 172 22 38 72, Email: contact@president.gov.by    • General Prosecutor, Alexander Konyuk, vul. Internatsyjanalnaya. 22, 220050 Minsk, Belarus, Fax: + 375 17 226 42 52    • Minister of Justice of Belarus, Mr. Oleg Slizhevsky, vul. Kalektarnaya, 10, 220004 Minsk, Belarus, Email: kanc@minjust.by    • President of the Supreme Court of Belarus, Mr. Valiantsin Alehavich Sukala, vul. Lenina, 28, 220030 Minsk, Belarus, Email: scjustrb@pmrb.gov.by    • H.E. Mr. Mikhail Khvostov, Permanent Mission of Belarus to the United Nations in Geneva, 15 avenue de la paix, 1211 Geneva 20, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 748 24 51. Email: mission.belarus@ties.itu.int    • Embassy of Belarus in Brussels, 192 avenue Molière, 1050 Ixelles, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2.340.02.87, Email : embbel@skynet.be Please also write to the
diplomatic mission or embassy of Belarus in your respective country.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, December 20,
2013
 
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.  
 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1
     43 55 18 80 Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / +
     41 22 809 49 29 