Egypt:  Egypt: Assault of 8 journalists
June  2, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2005 / JuneEgypt: Egypt: Assault of 8 journalistsCase EGY 020605 Assault  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Egypt.   Brief Description of the Situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Egyptian Organisation for Human Rights (EOHR), a member of the OMCT network, of the assault of 8 journalists, while they were covering the Kifaya demonstrations about the Article 76 Amendment Referendum in Cairo on May 25, 2005.  According to information received, members of the security forces assaulted the following eight journalists in front of policemen while they were covering the Kifaya demonstrations:   1. Abdel Halim Qandil, editor of Al Araby newspaper 2. Mohamed Abdel Qadouss, reporter with the Journalists’ Syndicate Freedoms Committee 3. Shaymaa Abu el Kheir, journalist with the Dustour newspaper 4. Abeer al Askary, journalist with Dustour newspaper 5. Hany al Asr, journalist with Dustour newspaper 6. Wael Tawfiq, journalist with Dustour newspaper 7. Nawal Ali, journalist with al Geel newspaper 8. Iman Taha Kamel, freelance journalist  The International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its deep concern over the ill-treatment of these journalists by members of the security forces.    Action requested Please write to the authorities in Egypt urging them to: i. Order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of the assaults on the above-named journalists, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  ii. Guarantee that adequate reparation is provided to the victims;  iii. Guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, His Excellency Mohammad Hosni Mubarak, Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: webmaster@presidency.gov.eg, Fax:+202 390 1998  Minister of the Interior, His Excellency General Habib al-Adeli, Ministry of the Interior, Al-Sheikh Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: moi@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 579 2031  Minister of Justice, His Excellency Mr Faruq Sayf al-Nasr, Ministry of Justice, Midan Lazoghly, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 795 8103   Public Prosecutor, Counsellor Maher 'Abd al-Wahid, Dar al-Qadha al-'Ali, Ramses Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 577 4716  Ambassadeur Gabr, Naéla, Av. Blanc 49 (2ème), CH-1202, Genève, Suisse, e-mail: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, fax: +4122 738 44 15  Please also write to the embassies of Egypt in your respective country.    Geneva, June 2 2005.  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 