Bahrain:  Call for immediate release of Nabeel Rajab, as prison sentence is upheld
November 22, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2017 / NovemberBahrain: Call for immediate release of Nabeel Rajab, as prison sentence is upheld

PRESS
RELEASE – THE OBSERVATORY
BAHRAIN:
Call for immediate release of Nabeel Rajab, as prison sentence is upheld
 
Paris-Geneva,
November 22, 2017 – The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, an FIDH-OMCT partnership, strongly condemns the prison sentence
against prominent human rights defender Nabeel Rajab and calls for his
immediate release. Nabeel Rajab is spending his 527th day in
arbitrary detention and will have to serve a two-year prison sentence for
stating during TV media interviews that Bahrain bars reporters and human rights
workers from entry into the country.
 
Mr. Nabeel
Rajab is the co-founder and President of the Bahrain Center for Human
Rights (BCHR), Founding Director of the Gulf Center for Human Rights (GCHR),
Deputy Secretary General of FIDH, and a member of the Human Rights Watch Middle
East advisory committee. Detained since June 13, 2016, he is facing a series of
charges and up to 18 years in prison in relation with his freedom of expression
in different criminal cases.
 
In the “TV
interviews case”, he was facing charges of “spreading false information and
malicious rumours about domestic matters with the aim of discrediting the
State” in relation to three televised interviews made in 2015 and 2016 in which
he exposed Bahrain’s poor human rights record, in particular its ban on
journalists and human rights workers. After fifteen hearings before a lower
court and eight appeal hearings, the verdict took place today, November 22,
2017. The
Appeal Court upheld the two-year prison sentence. Mr. Rajab is also facing a
further 15 years in prison for tweets in which he
denounced human rights violations. The 18th court hearing in that case is
scheduled for December 31, 2017.
 
Mr. Rajab is
also being investigated for op-eds published on his behalf in The New York Times and Le Monde. In September, the Public
Prosecution brought new charges against him related to social media posts made
while he was already in detention.
 
Nabeel Rajab
was transferred to Jau Prison on October 25, 2017. He was subjected to
humiliating treatment on arrival, when guards immediately searched him in a
degrading manner and shaved his hair by force. Prison authorities have singled
him out by confiscating his books, toiletries and clothes, and raiding his cell
at night. Nabeel Rajab is isolated from other prisoners convicted for
speech-related crimes and is instead detained in a three-by-three metre cell
with five inmates.
 
“Nabeel Rajab’s unfair sentence violates his
basic rights and his freedom of expression. We are very concerned by his health
and detention conditions which keep deteriorating. Our Deputy Secretary
General's continuous harassment is outrageous and must stop.
Bahrain's authorities cannot get away with their crackdown any longer”,
FIDH President Dimitris Christopoulos highlighted today.
 
Mr. Nabeel
Rajab, 53, suffers from poor health conditions which have worsened because of
his detention. On May 12, 2017, the United Nations Committee Against Torture (UN CAT) issued a strong
criticism of Bahrain's record on torture and
ill-treatment, and noted “with deep concern” the arbitrary imprisonment and
ill-treatment of human rights defenders, including Mr. Rajab and Mr. Abdulhadi
Al-Khawaja, former BCHR President, sentenced to life in prison in June 2011
for politically motivated charges and whose health conditions have also been
worsening[1].
 
“Our call to the Bahraini authorities
is simple and straightforward: fully comply with the Committee's conclusions,
stop harassment and ill-treatment, release all those detained under spurious
grounds”, OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock
added.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members
of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European
Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil
society.
 
Press contacts:
FIDH: Samuel Hanryon: +33 6 72 28 42 94 / Audrey Couprie :
+33 6 48 05 91 57
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39



[1]                
The CAT concluding observations also refer to Messrs. Naji Fateel,
co-founder of the Bahrain Youth Society for Human Rights (BYSHR) and blogger, Abduljalil
Al-Singace, an engineer and blogger, and Hussain Jawad, President of
the European-Bahraini Human Rights Organisation with regard to their lack of
access to medical care while in detention. 