Sri Lanka:   Disappearance of Mr.Prageeth Ranjan Bandara Eknaligoda , a journalist working for the LankaeNews Website
February  9, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sri Lanka / 2010 / FebruarySri Lanka:  Disappearance of Mr.Prageeth Ranjan Bandara Eknaligoda , a journalist working for the LankaeNews WebsiteCase LKA 090210
Disappearance/ Fear for the physical and psychological integrity

The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sri Lanka.
Brief description of the situation
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source about the disappearance of Mr. Prageeth Ranjan Bandara Eknaligoda, a journalist working for the LankaeNews Website, since 24 January 2010, two days before the presidential election and shortly after he wrote articles supporting the presidential opposition candidate.
According to the information received, on 24 January 2010, Mr. Prageeth Ranjan Bandara Eknaligoda disappeared after he left LankaeNews Website office. The last person who heard from him was reportedly Mr. Gamini Perera, who usually drives him home. However, that day, Mr. Eknaligoda allegedly called him on the phone and told him that he had arranged an alternative transport and that he was at Koswatte.
According to the same information, on 25 January 2010, Mr. Eknaligoda’s wife went along with Mr. Perera to the Homogama police station and tried to register her husband’s disappearance, but the Officer-in-Charge (OIC) informed her that the station was unable to register the complaint without a previous instruction by a higher officer and advised her to register with the Koswatte police. Only after Mr. Eknaligoda’s wife insisted did the officer agree to register the incident.
Only once, on 28 January 2010, were Mr. Eknaligoda’s family and neighbors reportedly questioned on Mr. Eknalidoga’s disappearance by an officer from Homagama police station and two officers pretending to be from the Criminal Investigation Division (CID). However, to date, no information has been provided about the status of the investigation.
It is noteworthy that, after Mr. Eknaligoda disappeared, the LankaeNews Website was blocked by the authorities, until after the election. Furthermore, on 28 January 2010, its premises were searched at night by a large number of unidentified persons.
Furthermore, OMCT has been informed that Mr. Eknaligoda had previously been victim of an unresolved abduction. On 27 August 2009, he was reportedly taken away, blindfolded, and then chained in a cell by two men who were allegedly responding to instructions from someone referred to as a “higher officer”. Mr. Eknaligoda was reportedly released when the two men were told by the “higher officer” that he wasn’t the right target.
The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned about the safety of Mr. Prageeth Ranjan Bandara Eknaligoda, whose whereabouts remain unknown. OMCT fears that he may have been subjected to enforced disappearance or extrajudicial killing. OMCT is also very much preoccupied about Mr. Eknaligoda’s health since he has a serious diabetic condition and needs to have two daily insulin injection as well as specific medication following an open heart bypass surgery.
OMCT calls upon the competent authorities to carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the disappearance of Mr. Prageeth Ranjan Bandara Eknaligoda, in accordance with international human rights standards, the result of which must be made public, in order to bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law.
Action requested
Please write to the authorities in Sri Lanka urging them to:

 Immediately locate the whereabouts of Mr. Prageeth Ranjan Bandara Eknaligoda;
 Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Prageeth Ranjan Bandara Eknaligoda as well as of his family;
 Carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the disappearance of Mr. Prageeth Ranjan Bandara Eknaligoda, the results of which must be made public, in order to bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;
 Ensure that an effective remedy, including the right to full redress with compensation and rehabilitation be granted to the victim concerned;
 Ensure the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.

Addresses

Mr. Mahinda Rajapakse, President, Socialist Democratic Republic of Sri Lanka, C/- Office of the President,Temple Trees 150, Galle Road,Colombo 3, Sri Lanka, Fax: +94 11 472100 / +94 11 2446657, Email: secretary@presidentsoffice.lk
Mr. Mahinda Balasuriya, Inspector General of Police (IGP), New Secretariat, Colombo 1, Sri Lanka, Fax: +94 11 2 440440, E-mail: igp@police.lk
Mr. Mohan Peiris, Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12, Sri Lanka, Fax: +94 11 2 436421
Secretary, National Police Commission, 3rd Floor Rotunda Towers, 109 Galle Road, Colombo 03, Sri Lanka,Tel/Fax: +94 11 2 395960, E-mail: polcom@sltnet.lk
Secretary, Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka, No 108 Barnes Place, Colombo 07 
Sri Lanka,Tel: +94 11 2 694 925 / 673 806, Fax: +94 11 2 694 924 / 696 470, E-mail: sechrc@sltnet.lk
Permanent Mission of Sri Lanka to the United Nations in Geneva, Rue de Moillebeau 56, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 734 90 84, Email: mission.srilanka@ties.itu.int

Please also write to the diplomatic representations of Sri Lanka in your respective countries.

Geneva, 9 February 2010
Kindly inform OMCT of any action undertaken quoting the code number of this appeal in your reply 