Cambodia:  OMCT condemns killings of demonstrators in Phnom Penh and calls for immediate investigation and restraint
January  8, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2014 / JanuaryCambodia: OMCT condemns killings of demonstrators in Phnom Penh and calls for immediate investigation and restraint

Geneva,
January 8th, 2014. The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), the
principal global civil society coalition against torture, expresses concern
about the violent repression of protests early January 2014 over garment
factory wages and the political situation in the country, which led to the
death of at least five persons and the arrest of 23 persons, including three
human rights defenders. OMCT calls on the competent authorities to immediately
launch an independent, impartial and thorough investigation into these events. 
 
OMCT condemns the violent crackdown and excessive use
of force by security forces on various protests throughout Phnom Penh early
January 2014 by garments workers, monks, victims of forced evictions and
supporters of the opposition Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP). On January
3rd, 2014, at least five individuals participating in a protest
demanding an increase in the minimum wage were killed and many others injured after
the military police indiscriminately and disproportionately used lethal force
against the protesters. OMCT is also concerned about the violent dispersal of
another demonstration on January 4th, 2014 in central Phnom Penh. 
 
OMCT recalls that under international
standards, lethal force by law enforcement officials can only be used when
strictly necessary to protect lives and in accordance with the principle of
proportionality.
 
The authorities should give clear instructions to security
forces to refrain from using force against protestors and to act in accordance
with human rights standards, notably with the United Nations Basic Principles
on the Use of Force and Firearms, which stipulates that security forces shall “apply
nonviolent means before resorting to the use of force and firearms,” and that
“whenever the lawful use of force and firearms is unavoidable, law enforcement
officials shall: (a) Exercise restraint in such use and act in proportion to
the seriousness of the offence and the legitimate objective to be achieved; (b)
Minimize damage and injury, and respect and preserve human life”. 
 
OMCT also
urges the competent authorities to launch a prompt, independent, impartial and
thorough investigation into these events, the result of which must be made public,
in order to bring those responsible before a competent, independent and
impartial tribunal.
 
OMCT is also concerned about the arrest and judicial
harassment of 23 persons, including three human rights defenders, Vorn Pao, President of the Independent
Democratic of Informal Economic Association (IDEA), which works for the
promotion of worker’s rights, land and housing rights, Theng Soveon from the Coalition of Cambodian Farmer Community, and Chan Putisak, a famous Boeng Kak Lake
activist. 
 
Vorn Pao, Then Soveon and Chan Putisak were arrested
along with seven other individuals on January 2nd, 2014 during a
protest on National Road 4 in Phnom Penh demanding for a greater increase of
the minimum wage. 13 others individuals were arrested on January 3rd,
2014. They were all charged under Article 411 “Intentionally causing damage
with aggravating circumstances” and Article 218 “Acts of violence with
aggravating circumstances” of the Penal Code 2009 and face up to five year’s
imprisonment and fines from $1’000 - $ 2’500. According to latest information
received, all 23 individuals are detained at the Correctional Center 3 (CC3) in
Kampong Cham province. Their whereabouts had been unclear for several days. 
 
OMCT urges the competent authorities to guarantee
their physical and psychological integrity at all times and to ensure that they
have access to their families, lawyers and medical professionals. OMCT is
concerned about the medical condition of several of these detainees, who have
sustained injuries during their arrest. OMCT has been informed that Vorn Pao needs
to take medicine daily since he underwent a kidney operation five months ago. 
 
OMCT also calls on the authorities to immediately and
unconditionally release the above-mentioned 23 individuals who seemed to be
detained solely for peacefully protesting. 
 
Furthermore, on January 6th, 2014, five
land rights activists from Boeng Kak
Lake, Tep Vanny, Yorn Bopha, Bo Chhorvy, Phan Chhunreth
and Song Sreiy Leap, were temporarily
arrested in Phnom Penh after starting a march asking for the release of the ten
demonstrators arrested on January 2nd, 2014. The were released the
same day only after they agreed to sign a letter stating that they will
temporarily not engage in further protests, conditions that OMCT condemns. 
 
Their arrest followed a ban on all demonstrations and
marches in Phom Penh by the Ministry of Interior until “public order and
security is restored”. No specific end date to the date was indicated. OMCT urges the Government of Cambodia to fully respect
the rights to peaceful assembly and expression and to stop ongoing judicial
harassment against human rights defenders and activists. 
 
Finally, OMCT calls on all sides to restrain from
engaging in any acts of violence, which seriously risk escalating the political
tensions and social unrest in Cambodia following the disputed election in 2013.

Contact: 
OMCT, Tel. +41 22 809 49 39 