Turkey:  The Supreme Court due to render its judgement on April 30 must put an end to the 16 years of judicial harassment against Pinar Selek
April 25, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Reports and Publications / Turkey / 2014 / AprilTurkey: The Supreme Court due to render its judgement on April 30 must put an end to the 16 years of judicial harassment against Pinar SelekTurkey_Mission Report_Pinar Selek_201420 pages / 820 KB
Publication
of a Judicial Observation Mission Report
 
Paris-Geneva, April 24,
2014. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), publishes today a report,
which presents the findings of a judicial observation mission conducted between
February 2011 and January 2013 on the trial of Ms. Pınar Selek, an academic
harassed for her work on minorities in Turkey. The report concludes that a
series of violations of the right to fair trial marred the 16-year long
judicial process and that Ms. Pınar Selek is suffering judicial harassment for
her commitment towards human rights. 
 
On April 30, 2014, the Criminal Chamber No. 9 of the Supreme Court is due
to review in appeal the decision of a lower court to sentence to life imprisonment Ms. Pınar
Selek, an academic known for her
commitment towards the rights of vulnerable communities in Turkey. The sentence
relates to spurious charges of causing a bomb to explode in Istanbul’s Egyptian
bazaar on July 9, 1998 and membership in a terrorist organisation. 
 
In 1998, Ms. Pınar
Selek was in turn accused without proof of supporting the Kurdistan Workers’
Party (PKK) and then of causing a bomb to explode in Istanbul’s Egyptian bazaar
on July 9 of the same year. On the basis of these accusations, she was detained
during two years and subjected to torture and ill-treatment, until her
provisional release in 2000. Istanbul Heavy Penal Court No. 12 acquitted her on
three occasions: in 2006, 2008, and 2011. Notwithstanding, the Prosecutor
constantly appealed against the acquittal before the Supreme Court, which
quashed the acquittal decisions. On January 24, 2013, the Istanbul Special Heavy
Criminal Court No. 12 decided to defer
to the Supreme Court's request to convict and sentence Ms. Pınar Selek to life
imprisonment.
 
Countless
procedural irregularities were observed during the trial: violation of the
right to be informed of the reasons for arrest or detention, violation of the
prohibition of coercion during interrogation, right to a public hearing, right
to equality before the law and courts, manipulation of the panel of judges,
conviction based on inadmissible evidence including statements elicited by
coercion, infringement of res judicata principle, violation of the right
to be tried within a reasonable time, etc. 
 
The
Observatory recalls that the criminal case failed to demonstrate that Ms. Pınar
Selek was involved in any terrorism-related activity. Indeed, court’s
investigations largely confirmed the absence of any bomb and attributed the
explosion to a gas leak; in addition the other defendant in the case who had
accused her during interrogation withdrew his statement during the trial.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that the court that convicted Ms. Selek, one of
the courts with extraordinary powers which, in 2004, replaced State security
courts, has recently been closed following a reform of the Penal Procedure
Code.
 
The
Observatory further reiterates its call on the Turkish judicial authorities to
review its last decision and put an end to the uninterrupted harassment that
has been targeting Ms. Pınar Selek for the last 16 years, as it seems to merely
aim at sanctioning her for her legitimate exercise of the freedom of opinion
and expression.
 
See Observatory
mission report for a full chronology of events and a list of
recommendations to the Turkish authorities, the United Nations, the European
Union and other foreign diplomacies. 
 
The report is available in English here. 