A call by actor and filmmaker Gael García Bernal in Geneva "We need an international mechanism against impunity in Mexico"
March 13, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / 2018 / MarchA call by actor and filmmaker Gael García Bernal in Geneva "We need an international mechanism against impunity in Mexico"Geneva,
March 13, 2018. The International Film Festival and Forum on Human Rights (FIFDH),
the World Organization Against Torture (OMCT) and the Mexican Commission for
the Defense and Promotion of Human Rights (CMDPDH) have united to bring the
deterioration of human rights in Mexico to the attention of the international
community. Invited in Geneva by these three organizations, Mexican actor and
filmmaker Gael García Bernal stated: "The serious situation concerning the
rights of citizens in Mexico requires the urgent attention of the UN Human
Rights Council."
During a press conference organized by the FIFDH, prior to
participating in tonight's public debate at the festival on the theme: Mexico:
towards the end of impunity? Gael García Bernal explained that, for twelve
years, Mexico has faced an alarming level of violence. "The deployment of thousands
of military personnel to perform public security tasks in the context of the
war on drugs has resulted in serious violations of human rights and crimes
against humanity. Since 2006, more than 200'000 murders have taken place, 2017
being the most violent year of the last few decades of Mexican history.
He adds: "Mexico requires the urgent intervention of the
Human Rights Council and its member states to recognize and address the human
rights crisis. We need the cooperation of member countries of the Council for
the establishment of an international mechanism against impunity that helps our
country emerge from this crisis and ensure that the crimes that take place are
not repeated. We want to stop the unbearable normalization of violence. We do
not want life to be about survival but to live it fully, freely, with joy and
hope. In Mexico, we want peace.”
"The
FIFDH is carefully following the human rights situation in Mexico. This year,
alongside Gael García Bernal, we have invited Mexican journalists Anabel
Hernandez and Ixchel Cisneros, as well as activist Juan Carlos Soni Bulos, who
will speak of the latest events taking place in Mexico with the audience."
explained Isabelle Gattiker, the director of the FIFDH.
Gael García Bernal will speak tomorrow at the General Debate
of the 37th session of the UN Human Rights Council. Year after year, violence
causes the deaths of young people, women and children, due to the actions of
the Mexican authorities. The main cause of the perpetuation of these atrocious
crimes and human rights violations, such as torture, enforced disappearances
and extrajudicial executions, is impunity, fueled by corruption and the lack of
willingness and diligence on the part of the institutions responsible for
investigating and administering justice, stated Olga Guzmán Vergara, a member
of the Mexican Commission for the Defense and Promotion of Human Rights
(CMDPDH).
"Although torture is a widespread practice in Mexico, as
confirmed by reports of the UN Human Rights Council, impunity reigns and
victims are forced to remain silent, without obtaining redress" states the
Secretary General of the OMCT, Gérald Staberock.
It should
be noted that among the more than 10,000 criminal investigations that have been
opened, less than ten sentences have punished this crime.
Public
debate at the FIFDH:
https://www.fifdh.org/site/fr/programme/mexique-vers-la-fin-de-limpunite-/374240 