Call for Participation - "Torture and Terrorism" Working Group
October  2, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionEvents / 2018 / OctoberCall for Participation - "Torture and Terrorism" Working Group Created in 1985, the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) is today the main coalition of international non-governmental
organisations (NGO) fighting against torture, summary executions, enforced
disappearances and all other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. With more
than 200 affiliated organisations in its SOS-Torture Network, OMCT aims at
accompanying, reinforcing and protecting anti-torture organizations around the
world and more especially in erosive environment. Thanks to our members, the General
Assembly and Executive council, the general secretariat (Geneva and Brussels),
as well as our Tunisia office, we can benefit from a wide range of expertise
and field experiences from all continents.
To reinforce those dynamics, the OMCT is launching for the
first time several thematic working groups, among them, the “torture &
counterterrorism” working group. As described in its terms of references, this
working group, by gathering a core group of 12 NGOs from all over the world,
will aim at providing advices and building support for all members of our SOS
torture Network dealing with issues related to the prohibition of torture while
countering terrorism, in particular regarding advocacy and campaigning.
Working group’s work will not only be the result of its
member’s work but of the Anti-torture movement’s contribution and all outcomes
will thus concretely contribute to reinforce all actors of the Anti-torture
Movement.
This Working group will be under the patronage of Ms Hina
Jilani, OMCT President, Prof. Nils Melzer Special Rapporteur on Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or degrading treatment or Punishment as well as Ms.
Fionnuala Ní Aoláin, Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of huma
rights and fundamental freedoms whil countering terrorism.
The first meeting is tentatively scheduled for December
2018/January 2019 in Tunis.
The present document describes the selection process and
contains the following annexes:
Working
group terms of references;Template of
motivation letter;Template of
letter of engagement.
1. How to Apply ?
All documentation can be found attached to this document
and/or can be downloaded from our website. They can be completed either in
English or French. Completed applications should be addressed to Camille Henry
at the following address: ch@omct.org.
2. When to apply ?
The deadline for submitting applications is Friday 26 October 2018.
3.  Who can
apply?
Members of
the SOS torture network as well as prospective members and strategic partners;
For
practical and financial reasons, this working group will only be able to work
in two languages (English/French). We strongly encourage those who master at
least one or two of these languages to apply.
4. How is the
selection process going to work ?
Consideration
of the submissions and establishment of a list of eligible members;
Evaluation
and pre-selection according to pre-established criteria: selection process will
ensure geographical, gender and age balance as well as complementarity among
professional profiles and field experiences.Pre-selection
presented to a selection Committee reporting to the Board for final approval;Information
to the organizations selected;Publication
on the OMCT website.5. Reference
material
Working group terms of references.
6. Documents to be
supplied in order to apply
An application will be considered eligible only if all the
documents are filled and send:
Motivation
letter completed by the NGO;
CV of the
NGO representative;
Letter of
engagement signed by the person you designated as your representative in this
working group.

This
initiative is made possible thanks to the support of: 