Turkey:  Ongoing judicial harassment of Ms. ?ebnem Korur Fincanc? (HRFT), Mr. Erol Öndero?lu (RSF) and Mr. Ahmet Nesin, after their first hearing
November 10, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2016 / NovemberTurkey: Ongoing judicial harassment of Ms. Şebnem Korur Fincancı (HRFT), Mr. Erol Önderoğlu (RSF) and Mr. Ahmet Nesin, after their first hearing​















URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
New information
TUR 004 / 0616
/ OBS 049.2
Judicial harassment
Turkey
November 9, 2016
 
The Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and
requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Turkey.
 
New
information:
 
The Observatory
has been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing judicial harassment of Ms. Şebnem Korur Fincancı,
President of the Human Rights Foundation of Turkey (HRFT), Mr. Erol
Önderoğlu, Turkey Representative of Reporters Without Borders (RWB), and
Mr. Ahmet Nesin, journalist, after their first hearing. 
 
According to
the information received, on November 8, 2016, the Istanbul Caglayan 13th Heavy
Penal Court refused to drop the charges of
“provoking commission of an offence”[1],
“praising the offence and the offenders”[2]
and ”making propaganda of terrorist organisation through means of press”[3]
against the three[4]. The Court decided to postpone the
hearing to January 11, 2017. 
 
The Observatory
recalls that the three face possible custodial sentences for taking part in a
solidarity campaign in support of the Kurdish newspaper Özgür Gündem. Ms. Şebnem Korur Fincancı
and Mr. Erol Önderoğlu were present in the crowded court room. They recalled
their legitimate right to freedom of expression and refused to see their
sentence commuted into probation if convicted. 
 
The Observatory deplores the continuing judicial harassment against Ms.
Şebnem Korur Fincancı, Mr. Erol Önderoğlu and Mr. Ahmet Nesin, which seems to merely aim at sanctioning their
human rights activities. 
 
The Observatory calls upon the Turkish
authorities to drop all the charges against them and, in the meantime, to
ensure that all judicial proceeding against them are carried out in full
compliance with their right to a fair trial, as protected under international
law. 
 
Background
information:
 
On June 20,
2016, the 1st High Court of Peace in Istanbul ordered the detention of Ms. Şebnem Korur Fincancı, Mr. Ahmet Nesin
and Mr. Erol Önderoğlu, pending an investigation into their alleged involvement
in the propaganda of terrorism. The human rights defenders presented themselves
after they had received arrest warrants, and were referred to the 1st High
Court of Peace after testifying before the Prosecutor on Terror and Organised
Crime at the Istanbul Court House in Çağlayan earlier that day, under
accusations of “provoking commission of offence”,“praising the offence and the
offenders” and “making terror propaganda”. 
 
Ms. Şebnem Korur Fincancı, Mr. Ahmet Nesin
and Mr. Erol Önderoğlu were questioned in relation to their participation in
the “Editor-in-chief on Duty” campaign launched in early May 2016 in solidarity
with the Özgür Gündem newspaper and to
defend freedom of press in Turkey[5].

 
Ms. Fincancı
was detained at Bakırköy Women Closed Prison, while Messrs. Önderoğlu and Nesin
were held in Metris Prison in Istanbul. 
 
On June 30, 2016, the Istanbul Caglayan 13th Heavy Penal Court ordered
the provisional release of Ms. Fincancı and Mr. Önderoğlu. 
 
On July 1, 2016, the 14th Heavy Penal Court ordered the
provisional release of Mr. Ahmet Nesin. 
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write to
the authorities in Turkey, urging them to:
 
i. Drop all the
charges against Ms. Şebnem Korur Fincancı, Mr. Erol Önderoğlu and Mr. Ahmet
Nesin and, in the meantime, ensure that any judicial proceedings against them
is carried out in full compliance with the defendants' right to a fair trial,
as protected under international law;
 
ii. Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of all human
rights defenders in Turkey, including Ms. Şebnem Korur Fincancı, Mr. Erol
Önderoğlu and Mr. Ahmet Nesin;
 
iii. Put an end
to all acts of harassment, including the judicial level, against all human
rights defenders in Turkey so that they are able to
carry out their work without hindrance or fear of reprisals;
 
iv. Put an end
to the ongoing crackdown on civil society under the pretext of countering
terrorism and recognise the legitimate role of human rights defenders, in line
with Turkey's international obligations;
 
v. Comply with
all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN General
Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular its Articles 1, 12.1 and 12.2;
 
vi. Ensure in
all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Turkey.

Addresses:
 
·       President of
Turkey, Recep, Mr. Tayyip Erdoğan, Fax: (+90 312) 525 58 31, E-mail: contact@tccb.gov.tr
·       Prime Minister of Turkey,
Mr. Ahmet Davutoglu; Fax: +90 (312) 403 62 82
·       Minister of Justice, Mr. Bekir Bozdağ, Fax: +90 (0312) 419 33 70;
E-mail: info@adalet.gov.tr
·       Minister of Interior, Mr. Efkan Ala; Fax: +90 (312) 425 61 30; Email: ozelkalem@icisleri.gov.tr
·       Ambassador
Izzet Selim Yenel, Diplomatic Mission of Turkey to the European Union in
Brussels, Fax: + 32 2 511 04 50
·       Ambassador
Mehmet Ferden Çarikçi, Permanent Mission of Turkey to the United Nations in
Geneva, Fax: +41 22 734 08 59; Email: mission.turkey@ties.itu.int
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Turkey in your respective
country.
 
***
Paris-Geneva,
November 9, 2016
 
Kindly inform
us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this
programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against
human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu , the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.
 
 
To contact the
Observatory, call the emergency line:
· E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
· Tel and fax
FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
· Tel and fax
OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1]                 Article 214 of the Turkish Penal Code states
that “(1) Any person who openly provokes commission of an offense is punished
with imprisonment from six months to five year.
                  (2) Any person
who arms a group against another group, or provokes to kill a person is
punished with imprisonment from fifteen years to twenty-four years.
                  (3) In case of
commission of offenses which involves provocation, the offender is punished
from solicitation.


[2]                 Article 215 of the Turkish Penal Code states
that “Any person who openly praises an offense or the person committing the
offenses is punished with imprisonment up to two years.”


[3]                 Article 7/2 of the Anti Terror Law states that “(2) Those who assist
members of organizations constituted in the manner described above or make
propaganda in connection with such organizations shall be punished with
imprisonment of between 1 and 5 years and with a fine of between 50 million and
100 million Turkish liras, even if their offence constitutes a separate crime.”


[4]                
Mr. İnan Kızılkaya, Editor in chief of
the newspaper Özgür Gündem,
is also facing the same charges.


[5]                 Özgür Gündem started the
“Editor-in-chief on Duty” campaign on May 3, 2016 to express solidarity and
defend press freedom against a number of investigations faced by the newspaper.
A total of 49 prominent journalists have served as one-day editors-in-chief
since the beginning of the campaign. Some 37 of them have been investigated up
to now. Yet, Ms. Fincancı, Mr. Önderoğlu and Mr. Nesin are first persons to be
arrested and detained in relation to the campaign. 