Kyrgyzstan:  Kyrgyzstan: arrest and incommunicado detention of three more members of the Hizb-ut-Tahrir
April 15, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2003 / AprilKyrgyzstan: Kyrgyzstan: arrest and incommunicado detention of three more members of the Hizb-ut-TahrirCase KGZ 100403.1 Update on KGZ 100403 Arbitrary and incommunicado detention / Risk of torture  Geneva, April 15th, 2003  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Kyrgyzstan.  New Information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information from the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights, a member of the OMCT network, regarding the arrest and arbitrary and incommunicado detention of three more members of the Hizb-ut-Tahrir religious group.  According to the information received, Sultan Tashtemirov, Akjol Karagulov and Kazakhstani citizen Erlan Bektemirov were arrested at the end of March 2003 (exact date unknown). The Department of Internal Affairs in Bishkek reportedly arrested them for criminal charges under articles 297 (Public calls to violent change of the constitutional regime) and 299 (Agitation of national, race and religious hostility). Sultan Tashtemirov was allegedly arrested for distributing anti-constitutional texts in Osh bazaar. Akjol Karagulov and Erlan Bektemirov were arrested in the Dordoi market. It is worth noting that there has been a perceived increase in the authorities use of repressive measures against this group since the beginning of the war in Iraq.  According to the information received, Colonel Kolbay Musaev stated that if an investigation proved that these men were guilty that they would be severely punished, giving rise to fears that they may be subjected to ill-treatment and potentially torture if they remain in detention. OMCT has previously received allegations that members of the Hizb-ut-Tahrir run grave risks of being subjected to sever ill-treatment and torture while in detention, with a number of them having died in detention both in Kyrgyzstan and neighboring Uzbekistan, where the group is also active.   The International Secretariat of the OMCT is concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of the afore-mentioned members of the Hizb-ut-Tahrir. OMCT calls upon the authorities to locate the whereabouts of Sultan Tashtemirov, Akjol Karagulov and Erlan Bektemirov and to guarantee their personal integrity at all times. OMCT calls for them to be released immediately, in the absence of valid legal charges. Furthermore, OMCT calls on the authorities to immediately halt the persecution of the Hizb-ut-Tahrir and to guarantee the freedom of religion in Kyrgyzstan.  Brief reminder of the situation  According to the information received, the 13 members of Hizb-ut-Tahrir were arrested for distributing leaflets opposing the war in Iraq, with around 200 such leaflets having been confiscated. It is reported that the leaflets, which were in Kyrgyz, Russian, Uzbek and Arabic, called on all Muslims to oppose the war in Iraq. Ten of those arrested were reportedly charged with inciting ethnic and religious enmity, under Article 229 of the Criminal Code. The detainees have denied having made any such statements in leaflets.  According to information received, the families of those arrested are not being told of the location of their relatives that are being detained, giving rise to fears that they may be subjected to ill-treatment and/or torture during this time.   One member of the Hizb-ut-Tahrir, Ulukbek Kochkorov, a resident of Sharq in Karasuu district, was reportedly arrested on April 3rd, 2003, and his family has not been informed of his whereabouts. On April 3rd, 2003, 15 people, mostly women, went to the police department to demand to meet with Kochkorov and to give him food. However, after the police told them that he had been taken to Osh City Center for temporary detention, the women reportedly began protesting, at which time the police forced the women to leave the premises. Another person who was arrested on April 3rd, 2003 was Anvarjon Iminjonov. The identities of the other persons remain unknown at this time.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Kyrgyzstan and urge them to:  i.	guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Sultan Tashtemirov, Akjol Karagulov and Kazakhstani citizen Erlan Bektemirov; ii.	order their immediate release; iii.	end the persecution and harassment of the members of Hizb-ut-Tahrir; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	Mr Askar Akayev, President of the Kyrgyz Republic, Kyrgyzskaya Respublika, 720003 g. Bishkek, Prospekt Chuy, 205, Fax: 996 312 218 627, Email: ghpress2@rhl.bishkek.su ·	Mr. Nikolai Tanaev, Prime Minister; fax: 996 312 661 382, e-mail: pmoffice@mail.gov.kg ·	Mr. Kurmanbek Osmonov, First Vice-Prime Minister and Minister of Justice, Kyrgyzskaya Respublika, 720040, g. Bishkek, ul. Orozbekova, 37; e-mail: minjust@bishkek.gov.kg  In addition, please write to the Kyrgyz embassies in your respective country.  Geneva, April 15th, 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 