Russian Federation:  Court orders Memorial Human Rights Center to register as “foreign agent”
May 27, 2014
Human rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2014 / MayRussian Federation: Court orders Memorial Human Rights Center to register as “foreign agent”This article is available in:English (main language)
Geneva-Paris, May 27, 2014. On May 23, 2014, a Moscow court ordered prominent NGO Memorial Human
Rights Center to register as a “foreign agent” for its human rights work. The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), within the framework of the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, reiterate their
concern about this decision and the continuous wave of attacks against
independent human rights organisations in Russia.
 
On May 23, 2014, the Zamoskvoretzky
District Court of Moscow heard on the merits the appeal lodged by the Human Rights Center (HRC) Memorial against a Public
Prosecutor’s warning of April 2013 requiring the NGO to register as a “foreign agent” under Russia’s
“Foreign Agents” Law. However, Judge Elena
Perepechina rejected the appeal, ruling
that HRC Memorial had engaged in pretty vague “political activity”. HRC
Memorial will appeal the decision before a higher court. 
 
It is also extremely worrying that the decision came
on the same day as the adoption by the Russian Duma (lower house of Parliament)
of provisions that will allow the Ministry of Justice to register NGOs as “foreign agents” at
its own initiative, without a court decision. The provisions will enter into
force when passed by the Federation Council (the upper house) and signed by the
President.
 
“Forcing one of the most important Russian human rights
organisation that fought for the rights of Russian citizens already under
Soviet days to declare themselves as ‘foreign agent’ is shameful. Is claiming
rights contained under the Russian Constitution really a foreign interest? Any
society can be proud of organisations such as the HRC Memorial with its steady
and principled support to human rights over decades”, OMCT Secretary General
Gerald Staberock said today.
 
The
Observatory recalls that the Russian
Law on Non-Profit Organisations in its current version imposed all NGOs receiving funds from foreign sources for any kind of
“political activities” (defined as anything likely to “influence public opinion
in order to change the policy”) to register as “foreign agents” or face
administrative and civil sanctions. On April 8, 2014, the Russian Constitutional Court ruled that the law was
respectful of the Constitution arguing the absence of any legal or constitutional grounds for contending
that the term “foreign agent” had negative connotations and therefore that the obligation to register as a foreign agent would not prevent NGOs
from carrying out their activities. The Observatory has repeatedly called for the abrogation of that law,
which blatantly violates international human rights standards. 
 
On April 8, 2014, the Saint
Petersburg City Court upheld that the Anti-Discrimination Centre (ADC)
“Memorial”, an NGO at the forefront of the fight against all forms of
discrimination, was performing the functions of a “foreign agent” by submitting
a report on police abuses to the UN Committee Against Torture, following unfair proceedings. Subsequently the
NGO refused to register under this unfair label and decided to liquidate its
structure and continue its work without registration in the Russian Federation.

 
“The decision on the HRC Memorial appeal and the amendment to the foreign
agent law reflect the current climate in Russia, where the legislation every
day closes another window of free expression. Over the last months we saw new
laws introduced and speedily adopted to allow the closure of independent blogs
and media without any judicial review or criminalise
the repeated violation of the already restrictive rules on public assemblies”, FIDH President Karim
Lahidji said. “Human rights monitoring and the defence of freedoms are
more needed than ever”.

The
Observatory reminds the Russian authorities that the United Nations Declaration
on Human Rights Defenders provides that everyone has the right, individually
and in association with others, “at the national and international levels […]
to form, join and participate in non-governmental organizations, associations
or groups” (Article 5) and “to solicit, receive and utilize resources for the
express purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental
freedoms through peaceful means” (Article 13). 