Joint statement by European NGOs: No EU trade agreement with Mexico without ex-ante sustainability impact assessment!
December 18, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Urgent Interventions / European Union (EU) / 2017 / DecemberJoint statement by European NGOs: No EU trade agreement with Mexico without ex-ante sustainability impact assessment!
Given the catastrophic
human rights situation, enormous social inequality and persistently high levels
of poverty in Mexico the question of the social, human rights and environmental
impact of the "modernization" of the EU-Mexico Trade Agreement is of
paramount importance. In May 2017, Misereor, Bread for the World
and the FDCL, in a joint study, already pointed to a possible worsening of
conflicts and social crisis as a result of the planned trade liberalization commitments
in the area of investment, intellectual property and energy. [1]
 
So far, on the European Union
side, the possible effects of the agreement have not been fully investigated. We
therefore welcome the European Commission's decision to fully explore the
potential economic, social, human rights and environmental impacts of the Free
Trade Agreement through a
Sustainability Impact Assessment (SIA). At the same time, from our point of
view, it is completely unacceptable that the SIA will only start at a time when
the negotiations are nearing completion.
Both negotiating parties
have repeatedly stated that they wish to finalize negotiations on the Global
Agreement by the end of 2017.
 
This approach blatantly
contradicts the Commission's own guidelines for implementing SIAs and the
declared objective of enabling better consideration of sustainability and human
rights aspects in the negotiations.[2]

 
According to the EU, SIAs
are independent ex-ante investigations, they are launched soon after the Council of the European
Union has formally authorized the Commission to enter into trade negotiations;
in general, not later than 6 months after the start of negotiations, to ensure
that the analysis can usefully feed into the negotiating process at a useful
stage. [3] In fact, the European Commission only assigned
LSE Enterprise with the implementation of Mexico SIA in November 2017, while the
negotiating mandate to modernize the Global Agreement had already been issued
by the Council to the Commission in May 2016. Since then, a total of six rounds
of negotiations have taken place. The next round of negotiations is scheduled
to be held in Brussels from 18.12.-22.12.2017.
 
In accordance with
the Commission, the
SIA should also rely on a broad consultation process of the relevant
stakeholders in the EU and in the partner country. The purpose of the SIA is to
bring to the
attention of negotiators in
good time the potential impact of the trade measures under negotiation and possible trade-offs, thus to support
sound policymaking.[4] However, the time and consultation plan contained in the Inception Report
of 5.12.2017 provides for local workshops in the partner country only in the
seventh month of implementation, i.e. after the completion of the interim
report. The results of the SIA will be presented with the draft final report
after a total of 10 months.
If the EU Commission were
to maintain its negotiation time schedule, it would generally
be impossible for the results of the consultations and the SIA as a
whole to influence the negotiations in terms of human rights and the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDG). In the absence of prior assessment of
human rights risks, the Commission thus
lacks the necessary empirical basis to meet the requirements of Articles 3 and
21 of the Treaty of Lisbon, according to which the EU must respect and promote
human rights also in its external trade relations.
 
Against this background, we
expect the Commission to:
 
-       
suspend
the negotiations until
the results of the SIA are available so that human rights risks and
sustainability risks of the agreement can be adequately addressed;
-       
ensure
a broad and transparent consultation process of all relevant stakeholders in
the implementation of the SIA, in particular civil society and vulnerable
groups, such as indigenous communities and defenders of economic,
social and cultural human rights;
 
We call on the EU Council and the Members of the European Parliament to:
 
-       
request
from the Commission an adjustment of the negotiation timetable, which
allows an appropriate consideration of the results of the SIA and the
obligations under Articles 3 and 21 of the Treaty of Lisbon;
-       
review
the interim results of the negotiations so far in the light of the results of
the SIA, involving civil society and, on this basis, to subject the May 2016
negotiating mandate to a fundamental revision;
-       
to deny
its consent to the agreement, unless the results of the SIA have been taken
into account in the ongoing negotiations.
  



[1] Thomas Fritz, Derechos Humanos en
el Olvido. La Renegociación del Acuerdo Comercial de la Unión Europea con
México, Mayo 2017, https://www.fdcl.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/FDCL_MEX_ES08092017web.pdf


[2] European Commission: Handbook for trade sustainability impact
assessment, 2nd edition, p. 11. http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2016/april/tradoc_154464.PDF


[3] ibid., p. 11


[4] ibid., p. 21. 