India:  Alleged ill-treatment inclusive severe beatings against Mr. Dhiren Mahato by members of the police and Joint Force in West Bengal
September 15, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / India / 2011 / SeptemberIndia: Alleged ill-treatment inclusive severe beatings against Mr. Dhiren Mahato by members of the police and Joint Force in West Bengal
Case IND 150911 
Alleged
ill-treatment/ Unlawful arrest/ No proper investigation
The International
Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your
URGENT intervention in
the following situation in India/ West Bengal. 
Brief description
of the situation
The International Secretariat of OMCT has
been informed by Banglar Manabadhikar Suraksha Mancha (MASUM), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the severe
beatings suffered by Mr. Dhiren Mahato, from the village of Nuniakundari, by members of
the police and Joint Force, in West Medinipur district, West Bengal. 
According to the information received, on 17
 July 2011 at about
1
 pm, Mr. Dhiren
Mahato was at the Bodhna Market, in the village of Bodhna, when several
policemen from the Manikpara Police outpost and members of the Joint Force
(which combines, among others, members of the Border Security Force, the
Central Reserve Police and state security forces) surrounded the market and
started to interrogate the people there. Mr. Dhiren
Mahato was reportedly forced into one of their vehicles after he informed that
he was from the village of Nuniakundari and not from Bodhna. When he first refused
to enter the car, the security forces allegedly severely beat him all over his
body with lathi (wooden sticks). He was then reportedly taken to the Joint
Force operation station, without any memo of arrest or being informed of the
reasons for his arrest. He was allegedly again beaten at the said operation
station. 
According to the same information received,
Mr. Dhiren Mahato’s family was not informed about his arrest for more than two
days. Family members tried to locate him but the police at Manikpara out post
and at Jhargram denied any arrest. On 19 July 2011, Mr. Dhiren Mahato’s mother submitted a
written complaint before the Sub-Divisional Office, Jhargram on the illegal
detention of her son. It was only later that same day that Mr. Dhiren Mahato’s
family came to know that he had been brought by the Jhargram Police before the
court of the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jhargram, and that he was
accused of being a Maoist activist in a pending criminal complaint. However, it
is reported that Mr. Dhiren Mahato’s name was not even mentioned in the
complaint. 
Mr. Dhiren Mahato was later transferred to
the Jhargram Correctional Home, where he remains detained pending trial. He has
reportedly access to a lawyer and his family. 
OMCT
is gravely concerned about the aforementioned allegations and therefore calls
on the competent
authorities to ensure that an investigation is carried out promptly, effectively, thoroughly, independently and impartially, in
accordance with international human rights standards, the result of which must
be made public, in order to bring
those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and
apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law.
OMCT
recalls that the authorities have to fulfil their obligations under
international human rights law to protect the right not to be subjected to
torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and to
bringing to justice those responsible for violating this right.
Action requested 
Please write to
the authorities in India/ West Bengal urging them to:

i.                    
Guarantee, in all
circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Dhiren Mahato and
of his family;
ii.                  
Guarantee unrestricted access to his lawyer, his
family and any necessary medical care and treatment that he may require; 
iii.                 
Carry out a prompt, effective,
thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the aforementioned
facts, in accordance
with international human rights standards, the result of which must be made
public, in order to bring those
responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply
penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;
iv.                
Order his immediate release in the absence of valid
legal charges that are consistent with international law and standards, or, if
such charges exist, bring him before an impartial, independent and competent
tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times;
iii.        Ensure
that an effective remedy as well as the right to full redress, including
compensation and rehabilitation, is granted to Mr. Dhiren Mahato;  
iv.        Guarantee
the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country
in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses 
Ø     
Mr. Shri Manmohan Singh, Prime Minister of India, Prime Minister’s Office, Room number 152, South Block, New Delhi, Fax:
+ 91 11 2301 6857; 
Ø      Mr. P. Chidambaram,
Union Minister of Home Affairs,
Ministry of Home Affairs, 104-107 North Block, New Delhi 110 001 India, Fax: + 91 11 2309 2979; 
Ø      Hon'ble Mr. Justice S.H. Kapadia, Chief Justice
of India, Supreme Court, Tilak Marg, New Delhi
-1, Fax: +91 11 233 83792,
 Email: supremecourt@nic.in
;  
Ø     
Justice K. G. Balakrishnan, Chairperson,
National Human Rights Commission of India, Faridkot House, Copernicus
Marg, New Delhi 110 001, Fax: +91 11 2334 0016, Email: chairnhrc@nic.in ; 
Ø     
Jusice N. C. Sil,
Acting Chairman, West Bengal Human Rights
Commission,
Bhabani Bhaban, Alipur, Kolkata -27. Fax: + 91 33
24799633, Email: wbhrc@cal3.vsnl.net.in ; 
Ø      M. K. Narayanan, Governor, West Bengal, Raj Bhaban,
Kolkata – 62, Phone:
+91 33-2200 1641, Fax: + 91 33 2200 2444 / + 91 33 2200 1649, secy-gov-wb@nic.in ; 
Ø     
Mr. Sri Buddhadeb
Bhattacharjee, Chief Minister, Government of West Bengal, Writers’
Buildings, BBD Bagh, Kolkata – 1, Fax: + 91 33 22145480, Email  cm@wb.gov.in
; sechome@wb.gov.in
; 
Ø      Permanent
Mission
of India
to the United Nations (Geneva), Rue
du Valais 9, 1202 Geneva, Tel: + 41 22 906 86 86 Fax: + 41 22 906 86 96,
Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy
of India in your respective
country.
*******
Geneva, 15 September 2011
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
 

​ 