Launch of a new initiative on media empowerment and torture
October 29, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / 2012 / OctoberLaunch of a new initiative on media empowerment and torture
  OMCT and GMEDIA[1]:

Geneva, 29 October 2012 
Today the World Organization Against Torture (OMCT)
and GMedia are launching a new initiative of empowering journalists to report
on torture and other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment.
‘Journalists
play a vital role in fostering the global rejection of torture. Reaching out to
them is essential if we want to bring UN anti-torture standards home’, said
Gerald Staberock, Secretary General
of the OMCT. ‘For too long processes such
as those before the UN Committee Against Torture (CAT) have been the prominence
of a selected few. We need to make them more accessible, understood and raise
the interest of journalists in them from countries around the world that are
examined by the Committee’, he added.
‘We are
supporting journalists to understand human rights standards and mechanisms,
including on torture. This partnership brings media and human rights expertise
together in order to build successively a community of journalists committed
against torture and serious human rights violations’, said Francesco Mochetta, Co-founder and
President of Gmedia.
Over the coming years both organizations will reach
out to journalists reporting on the issue of torture. As part of this
initiative they will invite and train journalists on international human rights
standards in parallel to the hearings of UN human rights mechanisms, notably
the UN Committee Against Torture (CAT).  
The first training of this sort will take place from
October 29-November 3, 2012 including journalists from Mexico. The Committee
Against Torture, the UN’s authoritative body against torture, will examine
Mexico’s anti-torture policies this week. The OMCT and members of the SOS
torture network (Human Rights Centre Miguel Agustín Pro Juárez,
the Mexican Commission for the Defense and Promotion of Human Rights and the
National Network of Human Rights Civil Society Organisations “All the rights
for all”) submitted three reports to
the Committee documenting the increasing escalation of violence, including acts
of torture, that are committed in a climate of impunity. A public briefing of
these reports will also take place on Tuesday, 30th October, at
6.30, at the Maison des Associations (Café-Resto les Savoise), Geneva.
For further information please contact:
OMCT, + 41 22 809 49 39 or +41 22 809 49 23 or gs@omct.org
Gmedia, +41 22 809 49 33 or
cvieiraneto@gmediacenter.net



[1] Gmedia is a Geneva based NGO whose mission is to
empower media in furthering civil society goals on human rights and democracy
including torture. To learn more about Gmedia visit www.gmediacenter.net. 