Iran:  Several trade unionists sentenced to long prison terms while one unionist is released on leave
December  2, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2011 / DecemberIran: Several trade unionists sentenced to long prison terms while one unionist is released on leave

THE OBSERVATORY - 
PRESS RELEASE
 
IRAN: Several trade unionists sentenced to long prison terms 

while one unionist is released on leave
 
Geneva-Paris, December 2, 2011. The 
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of 
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation 
for Human Rights (FIDH), expresses its deepest concern about the ongoing 
arbitrary detention of several trade unionists and human 
rights defenders in Iran, while it notes with appreciation the release of 
Mr. Ebrahim Madadi, Vice-President of the Syndicate of Workers of Tehran and Suburbs Bus Company 
(Sherkat-e Vahed).
 
Several trade unionists and human rights defenders have recently been 
sentenced to unjust terms of prison and others remain in arbitrary detention in Iran, often in horrendous conditions, with 
the only aim to sanction the legitimate exercise of their human right 
activities, amid the continuing repression of the Iranian civil 
society.
 
In particular, the situation of Mr. Reza Shahabi, the Treasurer and board member of the Syndicate of Sherkat-e Vahed Workers, who has been in pre-trial detention for 18 months since his arrest on 
June 12, 2010, has deteriorated in the past few days, after beginning a hunger 
strike on November 22, in protest of the Evin prison authorities’ lack of 
medical treatment and attention to his illness. According to the information 
received, the authorities are intent on keeping him in pre-trial detention and denying him 
medical treatment to break him. Shortly before, Mr. Shahabi had been 
transferred to the hospital due to having pain in his back and neck, and doctors 
told him after an MRI that some of the vertebra in his neck have deteriorated 
and are in need of surgery followed by six months of complete rest, and that 
without hospitalisation his left side might become paralysed. However, the 
prison authorities have not taken any action for him yet. In addition, his 
family has reportedly been refused access to him since November 20, and has 
received no news about his state of health.
 
Moreover, several other trade unionists have recently been sentenced, 
notably Messrs. Ali Nejati, Shahrokh Zamani, Mohammad Jarrahi, Nima Pouryaghoub, Sassan Vahebivash and Behnam Ebrahimzadeh. 
 
Mr. Ali Nejati, former President of the Independent Syndicate of 
Workers of Haft Tappeh Cane Sugar Company, started serving a one-year 
imprisonment sentence in Dezful prison for his trade union activities on 
November 12, 2011 following his sentencing in March 2011 by Branch 13 of the 
Islamic Revolution Court in the southern city of Ahvaz. He had previously served 
six months for the same charges and was subsequently expelled from work after 25 
years of working. It was reported that doctors consider him unfit for detention 
due to a recent heart surgery. 
 
On November 21, 2011, the sentences of Mr. Shahrokh Zamani, a member of the provisional board for 
reopening the Building Painting Workers Syndicate who was arrested on June 7, 
2011, Mr. Mohammad Jarrahi, a unionist member of “the Committee to Pursue 
Establishment of Labour Unions” who was arrested on June 20, 2011, Mr. Nima 
Pouryaghoub and Mr. Sassan Vahebivash, student activists, to respectively eleven 
years, five years, six years and six months of imprisonment were upheld by the Appeal Court on charges of “propaganda against the system” and “establishment or 
membership of a group opposed to the system”[1]. 
 
Finally, Mr. Behnam Ebrahimzadeh, a unionist member of “the Committee 
to Pursue Establishment of Labour Unions,” and a child rights activist, who was 
arrested on June 12, 2010 and later sentenced to 20 years of imprisonment, was 
reportedly sentenced in appeal to a reduced sentence of five years in late 
October 2011 for “assembly” and “collusion against the system”. 
 
On a positive note, the Observatory welcomes the release on November 
30, 2011 of Mr. Ebrahim Madadi from Evin prison as part of a furlough. He had been detained on the basis of a three 
and a half-year imprisonment sentence, which was issued against him in December 
2008 on false charges of “endangering national security”.
 
Accordingly, the Observatory urges the Iranian authorities to put an end to these 
acts of harassment against human rights defenders, to immediately and 
unconditionally release those presently detained in the country, to take all 
necessary measures to guarantee, in all circumstances, their physical and 
psychological integrity, and more generally to conform to the United Nations Declaration on 
Human Rights Defenders, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and 
international human rights instruments ratified by Iran.
 
For further information, please contact:
·         OMCT: Delphine 
Reculeau : + 41 22 809 49 39
·         
FIDH: Karine Appy / Arthur Manet : + 33 1 43 55 25 18



[1]
The four and a fifth trade unionist, Mr. Biuck 
Sayyedlar, were tried together as one group on August 18, 2011 by the 
Islamic Revolution Court in Tabriz without lawyers. Mr. Biuck Sayyedlar was acquitted of the charges. Mr. 
Sassan Vahebivash was released on bail on August 20. Mr. Nima Pouryaghoub was 
released on bail on September 8. Mr. Shahrokh Zamani was released on bail on 
October 19. Mr. Mohammad Jarrahi was released on bail on October 3. The four 
stand risk of arrest at any time because their sentences were upheld in appeal. 