Georgia:  The right to a fair trial for the Arrested Photo-Journalists in Tbilisi must be respected
July 18, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Georgia / 2011 / JulyGeorgia: The right to a fair trial for the Arrested Photo-Journalists in Tbilisi must be respectedJoint Letter_The Right to a fair trial3 pages / 255 KBThe right to a fair trial
for the Arrested Photo-Journalists in Tbilisi
must be respected
            
(18 July, 2011 - Paris, Geneva, Oslo, The Hague, London) We, international human rights organizations, call on the Government
of Georgia to guarantee
the right to a fair and public trial for the detained photographers and to
carry out an impartial and transparent investigation in accordance with
international human rights standards.
On 7 July 2011 at 3:00
am,
individuals in civilian clothes simultaneously arrested 5 photo-reporters at
their homes and detained them.
The following persons
were detained: 
·       
Zurab Kurtsikidze, photographer for the European
Pressphoto Agency (EPA);
·       
Shah Aivazov, photographer for the Associated
Press; 
·       
Irakli Gedenidze, personal photographer of the
President of Georgia, 
·       
Natela Gedenidze, photographer for the newspaper
Prime Time, and
·       
Giorgi Abdaladze, photographer for the Foreign
Ministry of Georgia and newspaper Alia.
Zurab Kurtsikidze
and Irakli Gedenidze had taken photos of the protest demonstrations on May 21, 2011
and documented the dispersal of protest rally in Tbilisi
on May 26,
2011, which were subsequently
disseminated by the European Pressphoto Agency (EPA).
The state security requested Giorgi Abdaladze to hand over the photos. According to Kurtsikidze’s lawyer – Nino Andriashvili,
he had bruises on his face when she met the detainee first day, however,
Kurtsikidze refused to appeal on this ground. 
In the
afternoon of 7 July 2011,
the Ministry of Internal Affairs emphasized in its official statement that
“Detainees are accused of supplying the organization, operating under the cover
of one of the foreign country’s special service, with various information,
against the interests of Georgia.”
The five photographers were accused of distributing the list of Georgian
citizens working in the UN. No further details were given[1].

Irakli
Gedenidze confessed to the charges brought against him at 2 a.m on 9 July 2011. Our organisations are
concerned that the testimony might have been given under pressure. Half an hour
later, his wife, Natela Gedenidze was released. A 10 000 GEL bail (about 4240 €) was imposed for the release of
Natela Gedenidze, considering that she had confessed and has two little
children.
On 9 July 2011,
the Tbilisi City Court approved two months preliminary imprisonment for three
of the detained photographers- Zurab Kurtsikidze, Giorgi Abdaladze, Irakli
Gedenidze. The court session was closed
to the public, but the statement of the Tbilisi City Court reads that the
defendants are charged with espionage and collecting, keeping and transferring
documents or any other data containing state secret to representatives of a
foreign organization. The crime carries the penalty of imprisonment for more
than 10 years. 
We do not
consider that the known evidence against the photographers is sufficiently
convincing and compelling[2]. Taking
the timing and circumstances of the confession of Irakli Gedenidze into
account, we are concerned that his testimony may have been given under duress.
We would like to remind
the Georgian authorities that international human rights obligations must be
met throughout the criminal proceedings against the photographers. In particular, we encourage the authorities
to conduct an impartial, independent, and effective investigation in accordance
with international human rights standards. 
We call on Georgian
authorities to respect the photographers’ right to a fair and public trial in
accordance with Article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights. In particular, we remind the authorities that
all defendants are entitled to the presumption of innocence until proven
guilty; the assistance of legal counsel of his/her own choosing and the
preparation of an adequate defense; the opportunity to examine the
prosecution’s witnesses and present witnesses in the defense’s favor; and to
not be compelled to testify against her/himself or confess her/his guilt. These procedural guarantees for all
defendants represent an important safeguard for ensuring respect for human
rights and the rule of law in Georgia. 
Finally, we call on
international organizations and the diplomatic corps in Georgia to monitor
the case against the photographers and ensure that the government of Georgia respects the
rights of the defendants throughout the criminal justice process.
Signed,
Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH
President 
International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)
17, passage de la main
d'or, 75011 Paris, France
Tel: +33 1 43 55 25 18
Email: fidh@fidh.org 
Eric
Sottas, Secretary General
World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
International Secretariat
8, rue du Vieux-Billard, 1211 Geneva 8, Switzerland
Tel: + 41 22 809 4939
Email: omct@omct.org
Harry Hummel, Executive
Director 
Netherlands Helsinki Committee
P.O. Box 11717, 2502 AS The Hague, The Netherlands
Tel: +31 70 392 6700
Email: hhummel@nhc.nl

Aage Borchgrevink, Adviser
Norwegian Helsinki Committee
Kirkegata 5, 0153 Oslo, Norway
Tel: +4790751150
Email: borchgrevink@nhc.no
Rohan Jayasekera
Associate Editor and
Deputy Chief Executive
Index on Censorship
Free Word Centre
60
Farringdon Road
London, EC1R 3GA, UK
Tel: +44 (0) 20
7324 2522
Email: rj@indexoncensorship.org



[1]          
It is noteworthy that the
list which the photographers are accused of having distributed is not a
confidential document and that the status Top Secret was a handwritten
note on the document.


[2]Phone
conversations between the Photo reporters show that money to the photographers
is transferred legally. The video material distributed by the Ministry of
Internal Affairs to document work of Russian spies, does not show any
connection with Zurab Kurtsikidze. The list of Georgian citizens working in the
UN, which the photographers are accused of having distributed, is not a
confidential document. It is noteworthy that the status Top Secret was a
handwritten note on the document. 