Burundi:  Joint Letter to the UN Security Council Members
March  8, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent Interventions / Burundi / 2017 / MarchBurundi: Joint Letter to the UN Security Council MembersJoint NGO Letter to UNSC on Burundi2 pages / 90 KB
New York, February 22,
2017
Dear Ambassador,
We, the undersigned international
and Burundian nongovernmental organizations, write to urge the UN Security
Council to impose targeted sanctions against individuals responsible for ongoing
serious human rights violations in Burundi. Such measures, including travel
bans and asset freezes, would send an important message to Burundian leaders
who have faced little consequence for continuing to perpetrate gross abuses against
their own people.
While the Burundian
authorities have released some prisoners, they have continued their broader
policy of repression against suspected opponents, independent civil society,
and media, and they have deliberately obstructed the ability of the UN to document
rights violations. Police and members of the youth league of the ruling party,
the Imbonerakure, continue to commit
abuses with impunity. Imbonerakure members have killed, tortured, raped, and
severely beaten scores of people across the country, including Burundians
fleeing to Tanzanian refugee camps. In addition, on January 23, the government enacted
a new law on international nongovernmental organizations. It places
restrictions on freedom of expression, association, and assembly and provides
new and sweeping powers to the government to control international nongovernmental
organizations and repress critical voices.
Following a damning report by the UN Independent
Investigation in Burundi released
in September 2016 and detailing gross and systematic human rights violations,
Burundian authorities suspended all cooperation with the Office of the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights in Burundi and declared the three UN independent
experts who authored the report persona
non grata. A UN Commission of Inquiry was authorized by the Human Rights
Council but denied access to the country. More recently, UN staff have had difficulty
obtaining visas, securing meetings with key government officials, and operating
in the country. Burundian authorities also continue to refuse the deployment of
228 unarmed police, as mandated by the Security Council last July.
The African Union authorized the
deployment of 100 human rights observers and 100 military observers, but only a
small number have been deployed because of disagreements between the Burundian
government and the AU. The AU human rights observers based in Bujumbura have
been unable to work unhindered in the country.
The government’s obstruction
of the UN’s ability to document and mitigate violations should compel members
of the Security Council to take strong action. A Security Council mandated
panel of experts could help identify officials, whether in government or the
opposition, most responsible for ongoing summary executions, torture, and other
serious human rights abuses.  It would be
important to ensure that such sanctions are targeted at those responsible for
ongoing abuses, make it clear what they need to do to end the sanctions against
them and give all affected directly by such sanctions strong due process rights
in being able to challenge the sanctions.
Targeted individual
sanctions should have no negative effect on the broader Burundian population,
but could send an important signal to decision makers that continued human
rights violations will come at a price. If Security Council members allow Burundian
officials to continue to abuse their people and openly flaunt their disregard
for the Council’s decisions without consequences, they will feel emboldened and
other countries may take notice. 
We are available to
discuss this issue further with you and your experts.
Sincerely,
Action des Chrétiens pour l'Abolition de la
Torture au Burundi (ACAT Burundi)
Association Burundaise pour la Protection
des Droits Humains et des Personnes Détenues (APRODH)
Atrocities Watch – Africa
Coalition de la Société Civile pour le
Monitoring Électoral (COSOME)
Fédération Internationale de l'Action des
Chrétiens pour l'Abolition de la Torture (FIACAT)
Forum pour la Conscience et le
Développement (FOCODE)
Forum pour le Renforcement de la Société
Civile (FORSC)
Global Centre for the
Responsibility to Protect
Human Rights Watch
International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)
Mouvement Citoyen pour l'Avenir du Burundi
(MCA Burundi)
Partnership for
Justice
Refugees International
Reporters Without Borders
Réseau des Citoyens Probes (RCP)
SOS-Torture/Burundi
Ökumenisches Netz Zentralafrika (ÖNZ)
Organisation pour la Transparence et la
Gouvernance (OTRAG Burundi)
World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) 