Turkey:  The Supreme Court overturns life sentence against Pinar Selek - Pinar Selek to be re-tried for the 5th time
June 12, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2014 / JuneTurkey: The Supreme Court overturns life sentence against Pinar Selek - Pinar Selek to be re-tried for the 5th time Paris-Geneva, June 12, 2014. The Supreme Court overturned the life
sentence issued against sociologist Pınar Selek on January 24, 2014. The case
will have to be re-tried before a lower court for the fifth time. Today, the
Turkish judicial system must demonstrate that it tolerates dissenting voices,
by putting a final point to this saga and definitely acquitting Ms. Selek.
 
On June 11, 2014, the Criminal Chamber No. 9 of the Supreme Court decided to overturn the
decision of a lower court to sentence to life imprisonment Ms. Pınar Selek,
an academic known for her commitment towards the rights of vulnerable
communities in Turkey. The court argued that Istanbul Special Heavy Criminal
Court No. 12 had violated procedural rules, by revoking its own decision of
acquittal while the case had already been transferred for review to a higher
court.
 
“The Pınar Selek case illustrates a 16-year long relentless and
vain harassment aiming at putting on the dock the prominent sociologist at the
cost of the right to a fair trial. The decision of the Supreme Court is a
consequence of this unthinkable drift. We should not only welcome this
promising judgement, but also call on the Prosecutor of Istanbul to drop all
charges against her”, said FIDH President
Karim Lahidji.
 
“Countless
procedural irregularities were observed during the quashed trial: violation of
the prohibition of torture and ill-treatment, conviction based on inadmissible
evidence including statements elicited by coercion, infringement of res
judicata principle, violation of the right to be tried within a reasonable
time, etc. The Supreme Court should not only have overturned the sentence but
also confirmed the initial acquittal decision”, said Martin Pradel, Lawyer at the Paris Bar, trial observer for the
Observatory.
 
In 1998, Ms. Pınar Selek was
accused of supporting the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) and, subsequently and
without evidence, of causing a bomb to explode in Istanbul’s Egyptian bazaar on
July 9 of the same year. On the basis of these accusations, she was detained during
two years and subjected to torture and ill-treatment, until her provisional
release in 2000. The Istanbul Heavy Penal Court No. 12 acquitted her on three
occasions: in 2006, 2008, and 2011. Notwithstanding, the Supreme Court quashed
the first two acquittal decisions. On January 24, 2013, the Istanbul Special
Heavy Criminal Court No. 12 decided to
defer to the Supreme Court's request to convict and sentence Ms. Pınar Selek to
life imprisonment, though the case was still pending before the Supreme
Court. The
Supreme Court referred the case back to lower courts for trial.
 
It is
worth mentioning that the lower courts which had previously tried Ms. Selek,
and held extraordinary powers (the Special Criminal Courts), were suppressed in
2014 on the occasion of a reform of the Penal Procedure Code, following
condemnations for violations of the right to a fair trial by the European Court
of Human Rights.
 
“The judicial system should prove that this important
reform is not just cosmetic and that Turkish citizens can effectively enjoy the
right to a fair trial within a reasonable time, away from the games of politics”, said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock. “Moreover,
we recall that the criminal
case has failed to demonstrate that Ms. Pınar Selek was involved in any
terrorism-related activity. Consequently she should be definitely acquitted”, he further urged.
 
For more information see
Observatory mission report available in English on the following web links:
http://www.fidh.org/IMG/pdf/obsreporttur2014eng.pdf
http://www.omct.org/files/2014/04/22642/turkey_mission_report_pinar_selek_2014.pdf 