South Africa:  ESCR-Net condemns murder of Sibonelo Patrick Mpeku, calls for end to attacks against South African human rights defenders
December  5, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / South Africa / 2017 / DecemberSouth Africa: ESCR-Net condemns murder of Sibonelo Patrick Mpeku, calls for end to attacks against South African human rights defenders 

ESCR-Net - The International Network for Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, of which OMCT is a member organization, is the
largest global network of organizations and advocates devoted to achieving economic,
social and environmental justice through human rights, consisting of over 280
organizational and individual members in more than 75 countries.
​On 5 December, ESCR-Net sent a letter to Jacob Zuma, President of South Africa,
 to express the Network’s collective concern following the murder of 
Sibonelo Patrick Mpeku. Mr. Mpeku, 32 years old, was a leader of 
ESCR-Net member Abahlali baseMjondolo, social movement of shack-dwellers
 living in South Africa’s informal settlements. In Abahlali he served as
 chairperson for the Sisonke Village branch and the KwaZulu/Natal 
Provincial Council.
Mpeku was reportedly killed around 11:00pm on Sunday, 19 November 
2017, when he was dragged from his home and stabbed in Sisonke Village, 
Lamontville, municipality of eThekwini, province of KwaZulu-Natal. 
ESCR-Net understands that this murder served as reprisal for his work to
 defend the human rights of the area’s residents.
ESCR-Net noted that this murder is the most recent in a wider trend 
of ongoing threats and attacks perpetrated against community leaders in 
the informal settlements in and around Durban, eThekwini municipality, 
in the province of KwaZulu-Natal. With particular concern at the 
apparent impunity following these acts, ESCR-Net also observed that 
various threats levelled against the human rights defender had been 
reported to the area councillor, the ward committee, the local police 
and offices of the governing political party, but no notable response by
 local authorities or the media was received. To date, no arrests have 
taken place with respect to Mr. Mpeku’s murder.
ESCR-Net called on the South African government to ensure a prompt, 
fair and impartial investigation and to guarantee that the perpetrators 
will be brought to justice and to protect all shack-dwellers and their 
community leaders from threats, acts of intimidation and violence as a 
result of their human rights work.  In light of the recent efforts by 
Mr. Mpeku, the Network also called on South Africa to undertake all 
necessary steps to address corruption in the allocation of public 
housing, forced evictions and unlawful demolitions affecting residents 
in informal settlements and shantytowns. Finally, cognizant that some 
community organizers have been denied access to housing, services and 
work opportunities as a consequence of their human rights work, ESCR-Net
 asked President Zuma to ensure that the human rights of all persons are
 upheld without discrimination of any kind, including due to perceived 
or actual political party affiliation. 