Thailand:  Arrest followed by the release of five of the 11 activists facing judicial harassment
January 25, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2016 / JanuaryThailand: Arrest followed by the release of five of the 11 activists facing judicial harassment


New Information
THA 001 / 0116 / OBS
008.1
Arbitrary
arrest / Release /
Ongoing judicial harassment /
Thailand
January
25, 2016

The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH) has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Thailand.

New
information: 

The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the arrest followed by
the release of Mr. Sirawit Seritiwat, Ms. Chonthicha Jaeung-Rew,
Ms. Chanoknan Ruamsap, Mr. Korakot Saengyenpan andMr. Abhisit
Sapnaphapan, five of the 11 activists[1] arrested on
December 7, 2015 and accused of violating the Head of National Council for
Peace and Order (NCPO) Order No. 3/2015 (see background information).

According
to the information received, on January 20, 2016, at around 10:30 pm, Mr.
Sirawit Seritiwat was abducted by eight men wearing military uniforms, outside
the gate of the Thammasat University Ransgit campus, in Pathumthani Province
near Bangkok. He was blindfolded, forced onto a pick-up truck with covered
plate and taken to an unknown area. When the car stopped, he was dragged to a
grass field where he was forced to kneel down, hit on the head, and kicked. Mr.
Seritiwat also reported being hit with a rifle barrel as he heard the sound of
a gun being cocked. Around 1 am, he was taken to the Nimitmai police station in
Bangkok, where he was held until the following morning, before being transferred again to Bangkok’s Thonburi
Railway police station.
The
police record of arrest indicated that Mr. Seritiwat was handed over to police
custody by military officers from the 2nd Battalion of the Army’s 2nd
Infantry Regiment. 

The
next day, on January 21, 2016 around 9 am, police arrested fellow student
activists Ms. Chonthicha Jaeung-Rew, Ms. Chanoknan Ruamsap, and Mr. Korakot
Saengyenpan, who had shown up at the Thonburi Railway police station to show
solidarity with Mr. Seritiwat.

The
four student activists were held at the police station until 1:30 pm before
being taken to the Bangkok Military
Court where the police filed a petition requesting pre-trial detention. They
were released around 4 pm after the Court dismissed the police request. Around
the same time, Mr. Abhisit Sapnaphapan,[2] was
arrested in front of the Military Court and taken to the nearby Chanasongkram
police station, before being transferred to the Thonburi Railway police station
in relation to previous charges of violating the Head of NCPO Order No. 3/2015.
Mr. Abhisit Sapnaphapan was released on January 22 at about 11:30 am after the
Bangkok Military Court rejected a police request for pre-trial detention.

The five are
among the eleven activists arrested then released on December 7, 2015, and
accused of violating the Head of NCPO Order No. 3/2015. If indicted by military
prosecutor, they will face trial before a military court, and could face up to
six months of imprisonment and/or a fine not exceeding 10,000 Baht
(approximately 250 Euros).

The
Observatory strongly condemns the ongoing judicial harassment against the
student activists, since it appears to only aim at sanctioning their legitimate
human rights activities, as well as their freedom of assembly, association and
expression, as enshrined in international human rights instruments.

More
generally, the Observatory calls on the Thai authorities to put an end to the
ongoing attempts to criminalise the 11 activists, as well as to put its
legislation on gatherings and protests in line with international human rights
standards ratified by Thailand.

Background
information: 

On
December 7, 2015, military authorities arrested 36 people, including student
activists during a train ride from Bangkok to Hua Hin, Prachuab Kirikhan
Province. Their “advocacy
trip,”
named
“the Train
Ride to Shed Light on Fraud at the Rajabhakti Park,” sought to demand the
opening of an investigation into alleged corruption in the construction of the
military-sponsored Rajabhakti Park in Prachuab Kirikhan Province.

On
their way to Hua Hin, the activists were stopped at Baan Pong train station,
Ratchaburi province, where 36 of them were arrested. They were subsequently
taken in military custody to the 9th Infantry Regiment Command, a
temporary military unit in Putthamonthon Buddhist Park, Nakhon Pathom. The
military officers claimed to have arrested and detained them in accordance with
the Head of NCPO Order No. 3/2015, which imposes a ban on political gatherings
of five or more persons without a prior official authorization[3].

While
in custody, some officers recorded their personal data and forced them to sign
a pledge vowing they would not join any political movement again in the future
and that they would not leave the country without the authorities’ prior
permission. Lawyers were denied access to the detainees throughout their
detention. All were released on the same day.

However,
11 activists, Mr. Sirawit Seritiwat, Mr. Anon Nampa, Ms. Chonthicha
Jaeung-Rew, Ms. Chanoknan Ruamsap, Mr. Thanet Anantawong, Mr. Kititituch
Suman, Mr. Wisarut Anukulkanm, Mr. Abhisit Sapnaphapan, Mr. Korakot
Saengyenpan, Ms. Kornkanok Khumta, and Mr. Vichit Hanhaboon,
refused to sign the pledge, and were therefore accused of violating the Head of
NCPO Order No. 3/2015.

On
December 29, 2015, the 11 activists who had refused to sign the pledge were
summoned by the Thonburi Railway police. The Thai Lawyers for Human Rights
(TLHR),[4] an
organisation that provides legal representation to the activists, submitted a
letter on behalf of nine of them to postpone the summons to January 8, 2016, on
the grounds that the latter would not be able to show up on that date due to
other ongoing judicial proceedings against them amongst others[5]. Accordingly,
the Thonburi Railway police allowed the adjournment as requested.

On
December 29, only two of the 11 summoned activists appeared. Messrs. Kititituch
Suman and Vichit Hanhaboon denied all charges. Mr. Vichit Hanhaboon was asked
to submit an additional written defense statement to the police regarding the
circumstances of the events by January 15, 2016.

On
January 8, 2016, three more activists, Mr. Anon Nampa, Mr. Wisarut Anukulkanm,
and Ms. Kornkanok Khumta, appeared at the police station and similarly denied
all charges.

On
January 13, 2016, arrest warrants were issued by the Bangkok Military Court for
the six remaining activists who had failed to appear at the police station on
January 8 as summoned.

If
indicted by military prosecutor, the 11 activists will face trial before a
military court, and could face up to six months of imprisonment and/or a fine
not exceeding 10,000 Baht (approximately 250 Euros), for violations of the Head
of NCPO Order No. 3/2015.

Actions
requested:

Please
write to the authorities in Thailand, urging them to:



i.       
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of the 11 activists, as well as of all other human
rights defenders in the country;





ii.      
Drop immediately and unconditionally all
charges against the 11 activists, as they only seem to be aimed at sanctioning
their legitimate human rights activities;


iii.     
Put an end to all acts of harassment -
including at the judicial level - against the 11 activists, as well as against
all other human rights defenders in Thailand so that they are able to carry out
their work without hindrances;


iv.    
Repeal the Head of NCPO Order No. 3/2015, which
contravenes Thailand’s
human rights obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (ICCPR);


v.     
Conform with the provisions of the UN
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the
United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially: 





Article 1,
which states that “everyone
has the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to
strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms at the national and international levels”; and

Article
5(a), which states that “For the purpose of promoting and protecting
human rights and fundamental freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and
in association with others, at the national and international levels: to meet
or assemble peacefully”;

Article
12.2, which provides that “"the State shall take all necessary
measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone,
individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats,
retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure
or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate
exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”; 



vi.  
More generally, ensure in all circumstances the
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with international and regional human
rights instruments ratified by Thailand.





Addresses:



•     Prime Minister, Gen Prayuth Chan-ocha,
Government House, 1 Phitsanulok Road, Dusit, 10300, Bangkok, THAILAND; Fax: +66
(0) 2 282 5131
•     Minister of Interior, Gen Anupong Paochinda,
Asatang Road, Ratchabophit, 10200, Bangkok, THAILAND
•     Minister of Foreign Affairs, Don
Pramudwinai, Sri Ayutthaya Building, 443 Sri Ayutthaya Road, Phaya Thai, 10400,
Bangkok, THAILAND; Fax: +66 (0) 2 643 5320; Email: minister@mfa.go.th
•     Minister of Justice, Gen Paiboon
Khumchaya, 120 Chaeng Watthana Road, Laksi, 10210, Bangkok, THAILAND; Fax: +66
(0) 2 953 0503
•     Pol Gen Somyot Poompanmoung,
Commissioner-General of the Royal Thai Police, 1st Building, 7th Floor, Rama I
Road, Pathumwan, 10330, Bangkok, THAILAND; Fax: +66 (0) 2 251 5956 / +66 (0) 2
251 8702
•     Mr. Wat Tingsamit, Chairperson of the
National Human Rights Commission of Thailand; 120 Chaeng Watthana Road, Laksi,
10210, Bangkok, THAILAND; Email: help@nhrc.or.th
•     Permanent Mission of Thailand to the
United Nations in Geneva, rue Gustave Moynier 5, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Tel:
+ 41 22 715 10 10; Fax: + 41 22 715 10 00 / 10 02; Email:mission.thailand@ties.itu.int
•     Embassy of Thailand in Brussels, 2 Sq.
du Val de la Cambre, 1050 Ixelles, Belgium, Tel: + 32 2 640 68 10; Fax: + 32 2
648 30 66; Email: thaibxl@pophost.eunet.be



Please also write to
the diplomatic mission or embassy of Thailand in your respective country.





[1]    The group includes members of
the the Neo Democracy Movement (NDM), an organisation advocating for the
restoration of democracy, for the end of trials against civilians before
military courts, and for the respect of human rights and freedoms. NDM is
driven by five principles: democracy, human rights, justice, public
participation and peaceful means (non-violence). 




[2]    On May 22, 2015, Thai police
arrested student activists with the Neo Democracy Movement (NDM) , including
Mr. Abhisit Sapnaphapan, in connection with their participation in peaceful
protests held in Khon Kaen and in Bangkok to mark the first anniversary of the
military coup. See Observatory Urgent Appeal THA 002 / 0715 / OBS 055.2




[3]    According to the Head of NCPO
Order No. 3/2015, Article 12(1) states that any political gathering of five or
more persons shall be punished with imprisonment not exceeding six months or a
fine not exceeding ten thousand Baht, or both, unless permission has been
granted by the Head of the NCPO or an authorized representative.




[4]    TLHR is an organization set up
after the 2014-coup to provide legal aid to civilian arrested and/or prosecuted
by military, and to monitor and document post-coup human rights situations and
violations throughout Thailand. Although in existence for just more than a
year, TLHR received a human rights award by the French Embassy in Bangkok in
December 2014.




[5]    For example, Mr. Thanet
Anantawong, who was charged with sedition for his Facebook post criticising the
NCPO, could not report himself to police as he had to appear before the Bangkok
Military Court for pre-trial detention and bail the same day. 