China:  Enforced disappearance of two monks in Gansu province_Fear for safety
June  3, 2009
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / China / 2009 / JuneChina: Enforced disappearance of two monks in Gansu province_Fear for safetyCase CHN 030609 Enforced disappearance/ Fear for safety  The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the People’s Republic of China. Brief description of the situation The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by The Tibetan Centre for Human Rights and Democracy (TCHRD), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the enforced disappearance of Mr. Tsundue Gyatso, 35-year-old from Gyengya village, and Mr. Sonam Gyatso, 38-year-old from Sangkok village, both monks at Labrang Monastery, since their arrest on 14 May 2009. According to the information received, Mr. Tsundue Gyatso and Mr. Sonam Gyatso were arrested on 14 May 2009 at Labrang Monastery during a raid by Chinese Public Security Bureau (PSB). Following their arrest, their family members and close associates asked the local Public Security Office to ascertain their status and whether food and clothes could be delivered to the detainees. The security officials reportedly told the family members that a further fresh interrogation was needed (see below) to clarify on certain things related to last years protests in Labrang and that they would be released shortly. However, no information was reportedly provided to the family as to their place and conditions of detention. According to the same information received, Mr. Tsundue Gyatso and Mr. Sonam Gyatso had already been arrested three times for their participations in a series of protests that took place in Labrang in 2008. The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the safety of Mr. Tsundue Gyatso and Mr. Sonam Gyatso, fearing that they may be subjected to ill-treatment and torture. OMCT recalls that China is a State party to the UN Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment which prohibits torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Actions Requested Please write to the authorities in the People’s Republic of China urging them to:   Immediately locate the whereabouts of Mr. Tsundue Gyatso and Mr. Sonam Gyatso;  Guarantee, in all circumstances, their physical and psychological integrity;   Guarantee immediate and unconditional access to a legal representation of their choice, their families and any medical treatment they may require;  Order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial, independent, competent and fair tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times;  Call upon the competent authorities to carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into these events, the result of which must be made public, in order to bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  Guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  Mr. Wen Jiabao, Prime Minister of the People’s Republic of China, Guojia Zongli, The State Council General Office, 2 Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 65961109 (c/o Ministry of Foreign Affairs) Mr. Wu Aiying, Minister of Justice of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang Sifabu, 10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6529 2345, minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cn Mr. Yang Jiechi, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang Waijiaobu, 2 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Beijingshi 100701, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6588 2594, Email: ipc@fmprc.gov.cn; Mr. Meng Jianzhu, Minister of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang, Gong’anbu, 14 Dongchang’anjie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100741, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 63099216 Mr. Ma Zhenchuan, Director of the Beijing Public Security Bureau, Juzhang, Beijingshi Gong’anju, 9 Qianmen Dongdajie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100740, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 85222320, Email: wbjc2sohu.com Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China, Ch. De Surville, CP 85, 1213 Petit-Lancy 2, Suisse, e-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int, Fax : +41 22 793 70 14  Please also write to the embassies of the People’s Republic of China in your respective country.  Geneva, 03 June 2009 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 