Azerbaijan:  Arbitrary arrest and acts of harassment of Ms. Leyla Yunus and her husband
April 30, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2014 / AprilAzerbaijan: Arbitrary arrest and acts of harassment of Ms. Leyla Yunus and her husband

AZE 002 / 0414 / OBS 031
Arbitrary arrest
/ Release / 
Obstacles to
freedom of movement
Azerbaijan
April 30,
2014
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Azerbaijan.
 
Brief description of the
situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the arbitrary arrest and
acts of harassment of Ms. Leyla Yunus,
Director of the Institute for Peace and Democracy (IPD) and a member of
OMCT General Assembly, and her husband, Mr. Arif Yunusov, Head of the Conflictology
Department of IPD.
 
According to the information received, on April 28, 2014, Ms. Leyla
Yunus was reportedly invited as a witness on the criminal case of journalist Rauf Mirqadirov[1]
to the Investigation Department of Serious Crimes of the Office of
Prosecutor General of Azerbaijan. On the same day, she applied and obtained a
five-year Shengen visa. 
 
On the evening of April 28, 2014, Ms.
Leyla Yunus and Mr. Arif Yunusov, who had just left a hospital where he was
treated from heart problems, tried to fly from the Baku Heydar Aliyev
International Airport to Paris via Doha. They arrived at the airport by a
diplomatic car accompanied by the French Ambassador and U.S. Charge d’Affairs. After the check-in, the
Yunus couple was rejected by the border guards. Only after the intervention of
Western diplomats they could cross the border. However, around 11.30 p.m. they were
deprived from their boarding passes and passports and were told that they were prohibited to leave the country.
As they were searched at the airport during three hours, their lawyer Khalid Baghirov was not allowed access to them. The
couple was seized a laptop and paper records.
 
At about 3 am on April 29,
2014, Ms. Leyla Yunus and her husband were brought to their apartment so law
enforcement officers could carry out a search. Ms. Yunus refused to open the
door of their
apartment and reportedly said that she would agree only if civil society
activists were present in the equal quantity as policemen. She also demanded to
be shown an order for the search, but policemen refused and showed it only to her
lawyer. That provoked a discussion between Ms. Yunus, the investigator and
policemen, which negatively affected the health of Mr. Arif Yunusov. At about 4 am, Mr. Arif Yunusov
had to be hospitalized in a pre-stroke condition.
 
As for Ms. Yunus, despite of her protests,
she was forced to visit a toilet room in a company of a male police officer.
Her verbal protest was rejected by senior police officer, who argued that this
was for security reasons.

At
about 7 a.m. on April 29, 2014, Mrs. Yunus was taken for questioning to the
Investigation Department of Serious Crimes of the General Prosecutor’s Office
of Azerbaijan. She was accompanied by her lawyer Khalid Baghirov as well as IPD
staff member and journalists.
 
The interrogation lasted nine hours and
included questions about joint projects of the IPD and Armenian NGOs as well as
her relations with journalist Rauf Mirqadirov. During her questioning, Ms Yunus
alleged that she knows Mr. Mirqadirov only as a friend and good journalist. At
4 pm, Ms. Yunus was released. The interrogation did not result in a decision on
arrest or a written undertaking not to abscond. 
 
At about 6 p.m., Ms. Yunus took part in the
search of her office. The inspectors reportedly
confiscated all computers, books belonging to Mr. Arif Yunusov, various print materials, including conference proceedings with
participation of Ms. Leyla and Mr. Arif Yunusov as well as visit card provided in 1994 by an
Armenian historian.
 
Around 7 p.m. Mr. Yunus and inspectors left
the IPD office for a search of the private flat of the Yunus couple.
 
The Observatory is concerned by the arbitrary
arrest and harassment of Ms. Leyla Yunus and Mr. Arif Yunusov, and calls upon
the authorities in Azerbaijan
to put an end to any kind
of harassment - including at the judicial level - against them as it seems to
only aim at sanctioning Ms. Yunus’ activities.
 
The Observatory is all the more concerned that these facts
might announce an intensification of the repression against Ms. Leyla Yunus,
and more generally those involved in the Armenian-Azeri dialogue.
 
Background information:
 
On April 19, 2014, Mr. Rauf Mirqadirov was arrested on his arrival to Baku on charges of spying for Armenia
(Article 274 of the Criminal Code). Mr. Mirqadirov participated in several
projects that IPD implemented concerning the management of Azeri-Armenian
conflict. 
 
On April 22, 2014 following
the decision of the President of Azerbaijan, a joint group of investigators of
the General Prosecutor’s Office and the Ministry of National Security was set
up to “uncover a big network of spies of Armenia in Azerbaijan”. 
 
On April 25, 2014, the appeal
of Mr. Mirqadirov against restraint measure was rejected. 
 
On the same day, Ms. Leyla
Yunus along with Ms. Laura Bagdasaryan,
Director of the “Region” Research Centre in Armenia, authored a statement
denouncing Mr.
Mirqadirov’s arrest and the set up of the joint group of investigators.
 
Action requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Azerbaijan, urging them to:
 
i.       
Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Leyla
Yunus, Mr. Arif Yunusov as well as of all human rights defenders in Azerbaijan;
 
ii.     
Put
an end to any kind of harassment - including at the judicial level - against Ms.
Leyla Yunus, her relatives and more generally against all human rights
defenders in Azerbaijan;
 
iii.    
Conform
with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by
the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially its
Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”, as well as its Article 12.2, which provides that the
State shall “take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the
competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others,
against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of his or her rights”; 
 
iv.    
Ensure
in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Azerbaijan.
 
Addresses:
 
· Mr. Ilham Aliyev, President
of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Office of the President of the Republic of
Azerbaijan, 19 Istiqlaliyyat St., Baku AZ1066, Azerbaijan, Fax: (+994) 12 492
06 25, (+994) 412 92 28 68, E-mail: office@pa.gov.az, office@apparat.gov.az
· Mr. Zakir
Garalov, Prosecutor General of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Prosecutor’s Office, 7 Nigar
Rafibeyli St., Baku, Azerbaijan, Fax: (+994) 12 492 06 82, (+994) 12 492 26 63,
E-mail:
z.qaralov@prosecutor.gov.az
· Mr. Eldar Mahmudov, Minister of National
Security, Ministry of National Security of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Parliament Avenue 14, Baku
AZ1006,
Azerbaijan, Fax: (+994)
12 493-76-22, E-mail:
cpr@mns.gov.az
· Mr. Ramil Usubov, Minister of Internal Affairs,
Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Azerbaijani Republic, Fax: (+994) 12 492 45
90
· Mr. Elmar Mammadyarov Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Azerbaijan, E-mail: katiblik@mfa.gov.az
· Mr. Fikrat F. Mammadov, Minister of Justice in
Azerbaijan, Inshaatchilar Prospekti, 1 Baku, Azerbaijan, e-mail: contact@justice.gov.az; Fax (+994) 12 430 09 81
· H.E. Mr. Murad N. Najafbayli, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Azerbaijan to the United Nations
in Geneva, Route des Fayards 237,
CH-1290 Versoix, Switzerland, Fax: (+41) 22 901 18 44, E-mail: geneva@mission.mfa.gov.az
· Embassy
of Azerbaijan in Brussels, Avenue Moliere 464, 1050 Brussels, Belgium, Fax:
(+32) 2 345 91 85
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Azerbaijan in your
respective country as well as to the EU
diplomatic missions or embassies in Azerbaijan.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, April 30, 2014
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human
Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.

 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41
(0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1
43 55 18 80



[1] Mr. Rauf Mirqadirov was deprived journalist accreditation in Turkey without any formal
reason, deported to Azerbaijan and arrested on his arrival to Baku on April 19,
2014 on charges of spying for Armenia. This procedure permits to avoid a
process of extradition and leaves no opportunity for appeal (See background
information). 