The European Parliament renews its call for the release of Nabeel Rajab
February  7, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2014 / FebruaryThe European Parliament renews its call for the release of Nabeel Rajab

Paris-Geneva, February 7,
2014 - On February 6, 2014, the European Parliament renewed its call for the immediate and
unconditional release of prominent human rights defender Nabeel Rajab,
President of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR) and Deputy Secretary
General of FIDH. 
 
The European
Parliament crucially pointed out the extent to which Bahrain tramples on the
law by keeping Mr. Nabeel Rajab in jail. It highlighted the fact that
not only does Bahraini domestic law confirms that the latter is legally
eligible for release, but also refers to the fact that his detention has
been clearly recognised as arbitrary by the United Nations.
 
It is clear,
from the reading of the European Parliament’s resolution, that continuous
refusal to release Mr. Nabeel Rajab would be additional evidence that, in fact,
and despite repeated promises by Bahrain to conform to human rights law,
Bahrain offers no credible progress.
 
“This European position both
clarifies and emphasises how concrete measures regarding the release of
arbitrary detained prisoners, the implementation of the BICI report and the
Universal Periodic Review, and the visit of UN Special Rapporteurs, are
required for the EU to conclude on credible progress in Bahrain”, said FIDH
President Karim Lahidji. “No more promises, the European Union now
requires action”, he added. 
 
“It is vital
for the EU to keep standing up for what should be evident global principles:
The liberation of human rights defenders and an end to impunity - two unkept
promises following the Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry”, said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock. “Progress on human rights will
neither be credible nor real for as long as human rights defenders are not free
or cannot work without fear of arrest and if impunity for torture remains
pervasive and complete”, he urged.
 
The Observatory (an FIDH-OMCT joint programme)
welcomes the overall picture given by the European Parliament, its call to
“release all prisoners of conscience, political activists, journalists, human
rights defenders and peaceful protesters, including Nabeel Rajab, Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja, Ibrahim Sharif, Naji
Fateel, and Zainab Al-Khawaja”, and its recognition that it is time
now for the European Union as a whole to engage in a stronger way with Bahrain. 