Iran:  Iran : Threats against Mrs Shirin Ebadi
December  5, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2003 / DecemberIran: Iran : Threats against Mrs Shirin EbadiURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY  IRN 005/1203/OBS 067 Iran Threats and intimidation 5 December 2003  The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint  program of FIDH and OMCT, requests your URGENT intervention in the  following situation in Iran.  Description of the situation :  The Observatory is concerned to learn that , the 2003  Nobel Peace Prize Winner was threatened by militia men while going to  the University of Tehran Azzahra (reserved for women) to make a  speech on women rights and the right of custody for the mothers.  A lawyer engaged in the defence of political prisoners, she is the  chairwoman of a children rights organisation and of the Center of  Human Rights Defenders which was created in 2002. In December of this  year, the Center will be attributed the Human Rights Award of the  French Republic.  On 3 December 2003, Mrs Ebadi was prevented by militia men linked to  the Hezbollah from entering the room of the university where she had  been invited to make a speech on women rights. The militia men  blocked the entrance door shouting slogans such as "death for Shirin  Ebadi", "Shirin Ebadi agent from the US, agent from the West" and she  had to hide in the cellar of the university. She was subsequently  brought back home. The President of the university underlined that  the intervention by the law enforcement officers had not been timely  and condemned the behaviour of the militias, which she claimed to be  "organised.".  The Observatory is concerned for the security of Mrs Ebadi. The  Observatory recalls article 1 and article 12 para 2 of the UN  Declaration on Human Rights Defenders : article 1 states that "  everyone has the right, individually or in association with others,  to promote the protection and realization of human rights and  fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels. "  Article 12 para 2 specifies that " The State shall take all necessary  measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of  everyone, individually and in association with others, against any  violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse  discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a  consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred  to in the present Declaration. "   Action requested :  Please write to the authorities of Iran urging them to :  i. Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mrs Shirin  Ebadi and allow Human Rights Defenders to act freely.  ii.   Take affective measures so that such threats are not repeated in  the future.  iii.   Respect the provisions of the Declaration on Humans Rights  Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on  December 9, 1998, in particular article 1 and article 12 para 2  mentioned above.  iv.   Respect the provisions of the Universal Declaration on Human  Rights and international human rights instruments ratified by Iran.   Addresses:  - His Excellency Hojjatoleslam val Moslemin Sayed Mohammad Khatami,  President of the Islamic Republic of Iran, The Presidency, Palestine  Avenue, Azerbaijan  Intersection, Tehran (Iran); E-mail: khatami@president.ir  - His Excellency Ayatollah Mahmoud Hashemi Shahrudi, Head of the  Judiciary, Ministry of Justice, Park-e Shahr, Tehran (Iran); Fax: +  98 21 879 6671  - The Iranian Embassy of your country   Paris, Geneva, 5 December 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this  appeal in your reply.  The Observatory, a joint FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the  protection of Human Rights Defenders, and aims to offer them concrete  support in their time of need.  To contact the Observatory, call the Emergency Line: E-mail: observatoire@iprolink.ch Tel and Fax: FIDH: +33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / 01 43 55 18 80 OMCT: +41 22 809 49 39 / 41 22 809 49 29 