Russian Federation:  Defend the Defenders Sponsorship : Say no to the judicial harassment against human rights defender Stanislav Dmitrievsky
January 17, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Russian Federation / 2013 / JanuaryRussian Federation: Defend the Defenders Sponsorship : Say no to the judicial harassment against human rights defender Stanislav Dmitrievsky Please write to any of the authorities below using our template letter.Kindly inform us of any action undertaken at omct@omct.org, quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. Thank you.Mr. Vladimir Putin, President of the
Russian Federation, Ilinka Str, 23, Moscow, 103132, Moscow, Russian Federation,
Faxes: + 7 495 606 5173 / 630 2408 Mr. Vladimir Kolokoltsev, Minister
of the Interior, Ulitsa Zhitnaya, 16, 117049 Moscow, Russian Federation,
Telegram: Rossiia, 117049, Moskva, Fax: + 7 495 637 49 25Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr.
Sergey Lavrov, Smolenskaya-Sennaya pl, 32/34, 121200 Moscow, Russian
Federation, Telegram: Fax: + 7 495 644 2203Mr. Vladimir Lukin, Ombudsman of the
Russian Federation, Tel: +7 495 607-19-22 / 607-34-67, E-mail: press-sl@ropnet.ru Mr. Mikhail Fedotov, Head of the
Council under the President for development of civil society and human rights,
Tel: +7 495 606-41-84,Fax: +7 495 606-48-55; E-mail: president-sovet@mail.ru; fedotov_MA@gov.ru Mr. Alexander Ivanovich Bastrykin,
Chairman of the Investigations Committee of the Russian Federation, Building
28, house 15, Naberezhnaya Akademika Tupoleva, Moscow, 105005, Russia, Tel: + 7
495 640 10 48H.E. Mr. Alexey Borodavkin,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the United Nations
in Geneva, Avenue de la Paix 15, CH-1211, Geneva 20, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22
734 40 44, E-mail: mission.russian@vtxnet.ch Ambassador Mr. Alexandre Romanov,
Embassy of the Russian Federation in Brussels, 66, avenue de Fre, Brussels,
1180 Brussels, Belgium. Fax: +32 2 374 26 13. E-mail: amrusbel@skynet.be  Ambassador Mr. Alexander Alekseev, Permanent Representation of the Russian
Federation to the Council of Europe, 75, allee de la Robertsau, 67000 Strasbourg,
Fax: (+33) (0) 3 88 24 19 74, representationpermderussie@wanadoo.fr
 Please also write to the diplomatic
mission or embassy of the Russian Federation in your respective country. 
Dear President/dear Minister/dear Sir or Your Excellency,
I have been informed by reliable sources about the
judicial harassment faced by Mr. Stanislav Dmitrievsky, Head of the
human rights organisation Russian-Chechen Friendship Society (RCFS), as chief
editor and co-author of the book entitled International Tribunal for
Chechnya. Legal Perspectives of bringing the responsible to individual criminal
accountability for the crimes against humanity perpetrated in the course of the
armed conflict in Chechnya, published in 2009.
According to the information received, on January 11,
2013, Mr. Stanislav Dmitrievsky was summoned to the court of Dzerzhinsk, in the
Nizhny Novgorod region. This trial is taking place in the framework of a case
opened against Mr. Dmitrievsky after the Prosecutor’s Office of Dzerzhinsk
filed a petition under Article 13 of the Federal Law on Countering Extremism to
recognise the book titled International Tribunal for Chechnya as an
extremist publication and to ban it as a result. During the hearing, several
inaccuracies emerged from the statements of the two experts authors of the
report which formed the basis of the Prosecutor's claim, Ms. Larisa Teslenko
and Ms. Irina Zhiganova, as they were neither able to mention their sources,
nor to explain why they used some phrases instead of others in their document.
The court also considered a number of applications and called as a witness
lawyer Karina Moskalenko, who reviewed the monograph in view of her attendance
at the next hearing scheduled for January 23, 2013.
The monograph focuses on the issue of supposed
responsibility of the military and executive leadership of the Russian
Federation in the Chechen conflict, and contains prospects for combating
impunity of the perpetrators in the light of international criminal law,
including the case law of the United Nations International Criminal Tribunals
for Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. It also aims at the establishment of a
criminal court for this conflict, on the grounds that the crimes perpetrated in
Chechnya would fall within the scope of universal jurisdiction.
I am concerned about the acts of judicial harassment
and the infringement of the procedural rights of Mr. Stanislav Dmitrievsky,
which take place in the context of the long string of government abuse of
anti-extremism laws against civil society activists, including human rights
defenders, 
In this regard, I am writing to urge you to put an
immediate end to any act of harassment against him as well as to ensure in all
circumstances that human rights defenders are able to carry out their
legitimate activities without any hindrance and fear of reprisals.
Moreover, I call upon you to comply with the provisions
of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN
General Assembly on December 9, 1998, especially its Article 6 (b) and (c),
which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others [...] as provided for in human rights and other applicable international
instruments, freely to publish, impart or disseminate to others views,
information and knowledge on all human rights and fundamental freedoms and
[...] to study, discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law
and in practice, of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through
these and other appropriate means, to draw public attention to those matters.
More generally, I urge you to ensure in all
circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with
international and regional human rights instruments ratified by the Russian
Federation.
Thank
you for your attention to this urgent matter.
 
Sincerely,

OMCT Sponsorship
project Defend the defenders 

Portrait of Stanislav
Dmitrievsky, Russian human rights defender judicially harassed 

In
the framework of its Sponsorship projet Defend the defenders, OMCT releases a
portrait of Stanislav Dmitrievsky, prominent Russian human rights
defender and Chairman of the Russian Chechen Friendship Society (RCFS).

Mr. Dmitrievsky, sponsored by Swiss Clown Dimitri, is once again facing
judicial harassment. As the court summons him for
co-authoring the book “International
Tribunal for Chechnya”[1],
it is feared that Stanislav Dmitrievsky will have to face criminal charges if
the publication is recognized as “extremist material”. 
 
Take action and defend the rights of
Stanislav Dmitrievsky. Write to the Russian authorities by using our
template letter.
Stanislav Dmitrievsky is sponsored
by Swiss clown Dimitri in the framework of the OMCT
Project Defend the defenders. 
 

Who is Stanislav Dmitrievsky ?

 
Mr. Stanislav is a Russian human
rights activist, a writer and an editor. He has devoted his life to actively
fight against injustice in Russia and North Caucasus. Former Editor-in-chief of
the newspaper Pravozaschita (“Human Rights Defense”), he has then been
involved in human rights non-profit organisations. He is also involved in the
civil society movement against the reportedly unlawful de-listing and
demolition of buildings of cultural significance in Russia.
 
He his currently the chairman of the
Russian-Chechen Friendship Society (RCFS), a Finland-based NGO.  The mandate of the RCFS is to monitor the human
rights respect in North Caucasus and especially Chechnya. In 2004, the
International Helsinki Federation has awarded The NGO for its work for Human rights.
Regrettably, Mr. Dmitrievsky had to move the originally Russia-based RCFS headquarters
to Finland when the Court of Justice of Nizhnii Novgorod shouted down the NGO
in 2006. 
 
Mr. Dmitrievsky is also a consultant
for the Nizhny Novgorod Foundation to Support Tolerance, directed by Ms. Oksana
Chelysheva. This Foundation has taken over the work of the RCFS after its closure
in Russia, and is now one of the three organisations composing the reconstituted
RCFS in Finland. Their collaboration led to the publication of “International Tribunal for Chechnya”, the book currently subjected to
investigation about its alleged “terrorist” content. 
                                                

The case on “International Tribunal for
Chechnya”

 
Co-written by Stanislav Dmitrievsky, Oksana Chelysheva and Usam Baysaev, the
prosecuted monograph “International
Tribunal for Chechnya” was launched in 2009. The book is, as described by
the authors, “the analysis of the crimes committed in the course of the armed
conflict in the Chechen Republic in the light of the norms of International
criminal law, including case developed by the two international Tribunals”. 
 
The monograph consolidates all available information
about human rights violations committed in the Chechen conflict by all
conflicting parties. It focuses on the issue of supposed responsibility of the
military and executive leadership of the Russian Federation, including
President Vladimir Putin, and contains prospects for combating impunity of the
perpetrators in the light of international criminal law, including the case law
of the United Nations International Criminal Tribunals for Former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda. It also aims at the establishment of a criminal court for this
conflict, on the grounds that the crimes perpetrated in Chechnya would fall
within the scope of universal jurisdiction.
As soon as the
book was published, the authorities tried to ban the volume, by conducting
criminal inquiries which could not result in a criminal case due to lack of
evidence. 
 
However, a
petition was filed by the Prosecutor’s office of Dzerzhinsk under article 13 of
the Federal Law on Countering Extremism and an administrative case
incriminating the book was opened in 2011, on the basis of experts’ conclusions
about “extremism material”. Following the case opening, Mr. Dmitrievsky was
questioned in April 2011, in a pre-investigation verification regarding the
book content. Such an administrative procedure does not fully comply with both
national and international law. 
 
Indeed a
preliminary court hearing has been held on an unknown date, without notifying
the authors of the book, which is contrary to the Code of administrative offences
of The Russian Federation. Indeed, the latter requires that “a judge, body, or
official, which tries a case concerning an administrative offence, shall be
entitled to regard the presence of the person, who is on trial in this case, while
considering it, as obligatory”[2].
 Otherwise, if the person involved in the case is not present, “the case
may be only tried if there is evidence of the proper notification of this
person about the place and time of consideration of his case »[3].
Mr. Dmitrievsky did not receive such notification, and the preliminary hearing
was carried in his absence, in breach of the Russian Federation legislation.
His lawyer then filed a request to hold a preliminary retrial, which was turned
down by the Judge, invoking that “Mr.
Dmitrievsky’s procedural rights would be restored later in the course of the
trial”. 
 
On November 28,
2012, Stanislav Dmitrievsky received an official summons to appear
before the court on December 6, 2012. The summons indicates that the hearing is
based on encountering extremist activities, as provided by the Russian law on
extremist activity but do not specifies which parts of the book are considered
as “extremist material”. Nonetheless, the Code of administrative offences
states that “a person who is on trial in connection with a case concerning an
administrative offence shall be entitled to familiarize themselves with all the
materials of the case”[4],
which in this case includes the right to be aware of which parts of the volume
are incriminated. Moreover, Stanislav Dmitrievsky has never been able to see the experts’ conclusions on which the case is
based. 
 
Moreover the
rights of Mr. Dmitrievsky are being seriously infringed regarding international
standards. Indeed the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
ratified by the Russian Federation, guarantees that “in the determination of
any criminal charge against him, everyone shall be entitled to the following
minimum guarantees, in full equality: (a) To be informed promptly and in detail
[…] of the nature and cause of the charge against him;  (b) To have adequate time and facilities for
the preparation of his defense and to communicate with counsel of his own
choosing”[5].
 
 
At last, if this administrative procedure
ends with the book being recognized as “extremist publication”, Mr. Dmitrievsky
could face criminal charges as the article 15 of the Federal Law on combating extremist activity
provides that “citizens of the Russian Federation, foreign citizens and
stateless persons shall bear criminal, administrative and civil liability for
the carrying out of extremist activity under the procedure established in
Russian Federation legislation”. 

 
Stanislav Dmitrievsky,
a human rights defender in constant danger

 
Dmitrievsky has continuously
suffered threats from both authorities and unknown attackers for the past years  aimed at
sanctioning  his human rights activities. . He has been subjected to
various kinds of persecution, such as arbitrary arrests, criminal prosecution,
home inspections and police intimidations. Last example of harassment occurred
in November 2012, as unknown assailants attacked his apartment, his office and
the apartment of his daughter. Men wearing masks spilt orange paint over
Stanislav’s office and destroyed the security cameras of his apartment. 
 
Nonetheless Stanislav Dmitrievsky
courageously continues to stand up for the protection of human rights. 
Chronology of previous acts of harassment
      September 2, 2005 : charges under
article 282 of the Russian Criminal Code for “action aimed at inciting hatred or hostility and at disparagement of
either an individual or a group of people according to their gender, race
nationality, background religious beliefs, as well as belonging to any social
group that are committed publicly or though mass media outlets”September 22, 2005 : summons for
questioning in relation to alleged fiscal irregularitiesFebruary 3, 2006 : Mr. Dmitrievsky was found guilty of “inciting interethnic hatred by using the
mass media”, and sentenced to 4 years of probation with 2 years suspended
sentence. The authorities closed down the RCFS. March 22, 2007 : threats of arrest
for Stanislav and Oksana Chelyheva. The Police was deterred by the announcement
of their intention to call on international Human rights organisations. The
same day, Dmitrievsky’s mother was visited by a policemanApril 8, 2008 : Stanislav was
threatened at his home by court officersApril 27, 2011 : summons for
questioning in relation of his book, by the Anti-Extremism CenterMarch 24, 2012: unknown assailants
attacked RCFS office with Molotov cocktailsJune 18, 2012: sentence of 15 days
of administrative detention after a protestJuly 23, 2012 : arrest for
participating in a protest against the demolition of an historical buildingNovember 1, 2012 : unknown
assailants attacked his apartmentNovember 4, 2012 : unknown
assailants attacked RCFS officeNovember
28, 2012 : Stanislav received an official summons to appear before the Court on
December 6. A second hearing has been held on January 11th, 2013.
 

Take action : Defend
the rights of Stanislav Dmitrievsky

For more information, read the urgent appeal  of the Observatory for the protection of human rights defenders, a joint programme of OMCT and FIDH, and write to the authorities of Russian Federation : http://bit.ly/UoaDcG
For more
information about the OMCT Sponsorship project Defend the defenders, please visit our website: http://bit.ly/u8puEj
 



[1] “International Tribunal for Chechnya - Prospects of
Bringing to Justice Individuals Suspected of War Crimes and Crimes Against
Humanity During the Armed Conflict in the Chechen Republic”, July 2009


[2] Code of administrative offences, Article 25.1, 3)


[3] Code of administrative offences, Article 25.1, 2)


[4] Code of administrative offences, Article 25.1, 1)


[5] International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, article 14.3, a)
and b) 