Kyrgyzstan:  Kyrgyzstan: arrest and detention of 5 Hizb-ut-Tahrir members
March 27, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2003 / MarchKyrgyzstan: Kyrgyzstan: arrest and detention of 5 Hizb-ut-Tahrir membersCase KGZ 270303 Arbitrary arrest and detention / Risk of torture  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Kyrgyzstan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received information from the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR), a member of the OMCT network, regarding the arrest and detention of five men in Jalal-Abad in connection with the repression to which the Hizb-ut-Tahrir religious group is being subjected.  According to the information received, the five citizens of Jalal-Abad were arrested and detained under article 299 of the Criminal Code.  Adyljan Izatulllaev from Kumushaziz village in Suzak district was reportedly detained on March 22nd for keeping 4 religious books of 10 pages. According to the information received, Aibek Satarov, Muhamadulla Madalijinat, members of  “Hizb-ut-Tahrir” and their relatives Ergeshov Bahtiyar and Bahadyr from Bazarkorgon district were detained for keeping leaflets concerning the group. It is reported that on March 24th, 2003, about 150 people protested in Bazar-Korgon, demanding that they be released.    According to our sources, the Hizb-ut-Tahrir is a non-violent organization, but the authorities of Kyrgyzstan are attempting to present Hizb-ut-Tahrir as a threat to the security of the country and a violent extremist organization and continue to persecute its members.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is concerned about the arbitrary arrest of the afore-mentioned persons, as part of the Kyrgyz authorities crackdown on members of the Hizb-ut-Tahrir religious group. OMCT has previously received allegations that members of the Hizb-ut-Tahrir run grave risks of being subjected to sever ill-treatment and torture while in detention, with a number of them having died in detention both in Kyrgyzstan and neighbouring Uzbekistan, where the group is also active. OMCT calls on the authorities to guarantee the detainees in question’s physical and psychological integrity, and more generally that of all Hizb-ut-Tahrir detainees, and to immediate release the afore-mentioned detainees in the absence of valid legal charges that are in line with international laws and standards. OMCT calls upon the authorities to halt the persecution of the Hizb-ut-Tahrir and to guarantee the freedom of religion in the country.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Kyrgyzstan and urge them to:  i.	guarantee Adyljan Izatulllaev, Aibek Satarov, Muhamadulla Madalijinat, Ergeshov Bahtiyar and Bahadyr’s physical and psychological integrity; ii.	order the immediate release of the afore-mentioned men in the absence of valid legal charges, or if such charges exist, bring them before a competent and impartial court and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	Mr Askar Akayev, President of the Kyrgyz Republic, Kyrgyzskaya Respublika, 720003 g. Bishkek, Prospekt Chuy, 205, Fax: 996 312 218 627, Email: ghpress2@rhl.bishkek.su ·	Mr. Nikolai Tanaev, Prime Minister; fax: 996 312 661 382, e-mail: pmoffice@mail.gov.kg  ·	Mr. Daniyar Narymbaev, Minister of Justice, Kyrgyzskaya Respublika, 720040, g. Bishkek, ul. Orozbekova, 37; e-mail: minjust@bishkek.gov.kg  In addition, please write to the Kyrgyz embassies in your respective country.  Geneva, March 27th, 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply 