Israel:  Israel: extra-judicial killing of three Palestinians in South Nablus
November  8, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2001 / NovemberIsrael: Israel: extra-judicial killing of three Palestinians in South NablusCase ISR 081101 Extrajudicial killing   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Israel.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Palestinian Society for the Protection of Human Rights and the Environment (Law), a member of the OMCT network, of the extra-judicial killing of three Palestinians being detained by Israeli forces in South Nablus, in the Occupied Palestinian Territories.  According to the information received, three armed Palestinians clashed with Israeli forces at around 12:50pm on November 6th, 2001, on the western hills of the village of Tal, in South Nablus.  The exchange of gunfire resulted in the death of one Israeli officer as well as the wounding of the three Palestinians, who were later reportedly killed by the Israeli forces, following their arrest. The three Palestinians were all from Deir Istia village in Salfit, and were identified as being:  ·	27-year old Jamal Khader Mlawwah  ·	28-year old Iyyad Odeh Al Khatib ·	22-year old Ali Ibrahim Abu Hijleh  According to reports, heavy gunfire was heard around 12:50pm. Palestinian Red Crescent ambulances arrived on the scene shortly thereafter, but were refused access to the three Palestinian men injured in the clash.  The paramedics witnessed seven Israeli soldiers firing at the already wounded Palestinians, but were then forced to leave the area by Israeli officials. The wounded Palestinians were then reportedly arrested and subsequently shot in the head, killing them. The Israeli troops handed their bodies over to the Palestinian Military Liason Office in Nablus that evening, and they were then admitted to Rafidia Hospital to be identified.    According to the information received, the Palestinian Red Crescent issued a statement, which included the paramedic’s report, in which it was confirmed that the Israeli troops killed the injured Palestinians after they had been arrested. Analysis contained in the report suggests that the three Palestinians were shot from close range, as the entry wounds were located in precise areas of their heads.  The International Secretariat of the OMCT is gravely concerned about the extra-judicial executions of Mr. Jamal Mlawwah, Mr. Iyyad Khatib and Mr. Ali Hijleh by Israeli police forces, as these acts are grave and blatant violations of international human rights and humanitarian law.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Israel urging them to:  i.   guarantee adequate reparation to Mr. Jamal Mlawwah, Mr. Iyyad Khatib and Mr. Ali Hijleh’s families; ii.  guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these events, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; iii. guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	Ariel Sharon, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, 3 Kaplan Street, Jerusalem 91007, Israel. Fax:(+ 972 2)566 48 38 / 691 79 15 E-mail: pm@pmo.gov.il or feedback@pmo.gov.il or rohm@pmo.gov.il ·	Meir Shitrit, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, 29 Salah al-Din Street, Jerusalem 91029, State of Israel. Fax:(+ 972 2) 62 8 54 38 or Fax: ++ 972 2 628 8618 Email: sar@justice.gov.il ·	Eli Yishai, Minister of the Interior, Ministry of the Interior, Fax: 00972 2 670 1411 Email: sar@moin.gov.il ·	Shimon Peres, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Fax:(+ 972 2) 530 3704, E-mail: sar@mofa.gov.il ·	The Supreme Court of Justice, Kiryat Ben Gurion, Jerusalem, Israel. Fax: (+ 972 2) 652 71 18 ·	Chief Military Attorney, Brigadier Menahem Finkelstein, Lishkat HaPatzar, HaKirya, Tel Aviv, Fax : (+972 3) 569 20 94  Please also write to the embassies of Israel in your respective country.  Geneva, November 8th, 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 