Bangladesh:  Parliament adopts NGO Law aimed at eradicating any critical voice
October  6, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2016 / OctoberBangladesh: Parliament adopts NGO Law aimed at eradicating any critical voice
Geneva-Paris,
October 6, 2016. Yesterday, the
Parliament of Bangladesh adopted the highly controversial and internationally
criticised Foreign Donations (Voluntary
Activities) Regulation Bill 2016. This bill, which will further repress critical human rights work in Bangladesh,
should be immediately revoked, the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (an OMCT-FIDH
partnership) said
today.
 
On October 5, 2016, the Parliament of Bangladesh
passed the Foreign Donations (Voluntary Activities) Regulation
Bill 2016. Once the Bill is transformed into a law with assents by the
President, it will repeal the Foreign Donation (Voluntary Activity) Regulation
Ordinance 1978 and the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Ordinance, 1982, and create
greater limitations to the work of civil society in Bangladesh.
 
“The absurdity is that freedom of
expression is a constitutional right in Bangladesh. Yet it is a right that is
no longer afforded to those who question the institutions that govern the
country. The Bill, besides being manifestly anti-democratic, leaves
no doubt that the intention is to shut down any existing human rights work and
critical voices in the country. This is a sad day for Bangladesh, as silence is
the end of democracy and the beginning of insecurity”, said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.

The Bill
states that the NGO Affairs Bureau (NGOAB), which is under the direct supervision of the Prime
Minister’s Office, will have the authority to cancel or withhold
the legal registration of a non-governmental organisation (NGO) or ban its
activities for having "engaged in anti-State activities",
"financing extremism and terror activities", or for "making
derogatory comments about the Constitution and constitutional institutions” of
Bangladesh, including the Offices of the President, the Prime Minister, the
Parliament, or the Supreme Court.
 
According to
the Bill, NGOs seeking to receive or use foreign funds must register with the
NGOAB, submit reports regularly and seek prior approval from the NGOAB for all
planned activities before receiving such grants. The Bill also empowers the
NGOAB to inspect, monitor and assess NGO activities at the NGOAB's discretion,
and NGOs will need approval and security clearance to hire foreign specialists
and advisers.
 
“This Bill
imposes disproportionate restrictions on freedoms of expression and association
in Bangladesh, in violation of international human rights standards.
Therefore, it represents a real threat to the legitimate activities of
independent NGOs”, said FIDH President Dimitris Christopoulos.
 
In November
2015, the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on the Rights to Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and of Association, Mr.
Maina Kiai, urged the Bangladeshi Parliament not to adopt the
Bill, stressing that “registered and
unregistered NGOs should be able to operate and function freely without prior
authorization or other undue impediments”.
 
The Observatory calls on the Bangladeshi authorities to repeal the
current Bill and to refrain from passing it into law, as well as to conform in
all circumstances with the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders as well as
human rights instruments ratified by Bangladesh.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the
Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or
remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH
are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights
Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
For more information, please contact:
·     OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41 22
809 49 39·     FIDH: Arthur Manet / Audrey Couprie: + 33 1 43 55 25 18 