Statement of the WHRD International Coalition on Women Human Rights Defenders Day
November 29, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2012 / NovemberStatement of the WHRD International Coalition on Women Human Rights Defenders Day

​

Statement
of the WHRD International Coalition on Women Human Rights Defenders Day
“Everyone has the right, individually
and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels.” –
Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs
of Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms [“The Declaration on human rights defenders”] (Article 1). 
“Women Human Rights Defenders are more
at risk of suffering certain forms of violence and other violations, prejudice,
exclusion, and repudiation than their male counterparts.” – UN Special Rapporteur on
the Situation of Human Rights Defenders, 2010 Annual Report to the General
Assembly. 
On the occasion of November 29th, Women Human Rights
Defenders Day, the Women Human Rights
Defenders International Coalition stands in solidarity with the
hundreds of thousands of women activists around the world who – with exemplary
courage, determination, and strength, uphold women’s human rights, the rights
of communities, and of the environment 
The Women Human Rights Defenders International Coalition is
a resource and advocacy network for the protection and support of women human
rights defenders (WHRDs) worldwide. An international initiative created out of
the international campaign on WHRDs launched in 2005, the Coalition calls
attention to the recognition of WHRDs. Their gender or the nature of their work
has made them the subject of attacks, requiring gender‐sensitive mechanisms for
their protection and support. The Coalition involves women activists as well as
all people who defend women's rights and lesbian, gay, bi‐sexual, and
transgender (LGBT) defenders and groups committed to the advancement of women's
human rights and sexual rights 
The Coalition affirms the great value of the work of WHRDs:
the struggle to defend human rights, to cultivate peace and to achieve
meaningful gender and social justice. It recognizes the different contexts in
which WHRDs work and the breadth of the challenges they face. It is proud to
support the diverse contributions of WHRDs from across the globe, and it is
inspired by the innovation, creativity and adaptability with which they are
transforming their communities every day 
Whether they focus on women’s human rights or other rights
issues, WHRDs are subjected to arbitrary imprisonment, torture, forced
disappearances, death threats, violations of privacy, sexual violence, name
calling and other threats to their credibility, closures of their organizations
and a host of other violations because of what they do, in defense of human
rights, and who they are as women challenging gender norms. Many WHRDs have
been displaced or have lost their lives because of their work. The Coalition
laments the severe violence WHRDs have faced and seeks to honour the memory of
those no longer with us through our solidarity and commitment to Defend Women
Defending Rights. 
The alarming increase in violence against WHRDs and
violations of their rights demonstrates the importance of strengthening
protection mechanisms and support networks for WHRDs across the globe. As
women’s role in the frontline of human rights defense is more visible, so are
the contexts in which violence against WHRDs and violations of their rights
take place. Fundamentalisms, militarism and conflict, globalization and
neoliberalisms, crises of democracy and governance, patriarchy and
heteronormativity are the key contexts that often overlap, as shown in the
Coalition’s Global
Report on the Situation of Women Human Rights Defenders 
The Coalition calls on all stakeholders and duty bearers to
uphold their national, regional and international human rights commitments to
ensure the promotion and protection of the rights of WHRDs regardless of their
race, ethnicity, nationality, religion or belief, status, age, caste, political
opinion, sexual orientation and gender identity as well as on other grounds or
contexts. 
For more information about the WHRD International Coalition,
our work and coalition members please visit: http://defendingwomen‐defendingrights.org. 