Bangladesh:  Release Adilur Rahman Khan, Secretary of Odhikar and a member of OMCT General Assembly!
August 13, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2013 / AugustBangladesh: Release Adilur Rahman Khan, Secretary of Odhikar and a member of OMCT General Assembly!

 
TAKE ACTION!
 
Please
take action to call for the release of human rights defender ADILUR
RAHMAN KHAN! To do so, kindly copy the enclosed letter and send it to the address
provided. Kindly inform us of any action undertaken at omct@omct.org,
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. Thank you for taking action!
 
· Ms.
Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, Gona Bhaban, Old Sangsad
Bhaban, Tejgaon, Dhaka, Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 8113243, Email: info@pmo.gov.bd
· Mr.
Muhiuddin Khan Alamgir, Minister for Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs,
Bangladesh Secretariat Building 4, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Email: mkalamgir@yahoo.com; minister@mha.gov.bd;
· Barrister
Shafique Ahmed, Minister for Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Ministry
of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka,
Bangladesh, Email: info@minlaw.gov.bd
· Mr. Hasanul Haq Inu, Honourable Minister, Ministry of
Information, Building # 4 (8th floor), Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka-1000,
Bangladesh. E-mail: minister@moi.gov.bd
· Mr.
Hasan Mahmud Khandaker, Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters,
Phoenix Road, Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh, Email: ig@police.gov.bd 
· H.E.
Mr. Abdul Hannan, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh to the United Nations in Geneva, 65 rue de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva,
Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 46 16, E-mail: mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.int
· Embassy
of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh in Brussels, 29-31 rue J. Jordaens, 1000
Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 646 59 98; Email: bdootbrussels@skynet.be 

Please also
write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Bangladesh in your respective
country as well as to the EU diplomatic missions or embassies in
Bangladesh.
 
 
Your Excellency,
 
I have been informed by the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, about the ongoing arbitrary
detention of Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan, Secretary of the human rights non-governmental
organisation Odhikar, a member of OMCT General Assembly and Executive Committee
Member of Forum Asia.
 
On August 10, 2013, at 10.20 pm, Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan was
arrested by eight or nine men in plain clothes who said they were of the Detective Branch of
Police (DB) as he was returning at his Gulshan residence in Dhaka with his
family. The men, who brought a white microbus apparently belonging to the
United Commercial Bank and a blue and silver coloured mitsubishi pajero, asked
Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan to follow them. They did
not present any warrant of arrest and did not inform neither his family nor Mr.
Rahman
Khan why they were arresting him and where they were taking him. 
 
The
Dhaka Metropolitan Police subsequently confirmed the arrest to the media,
adding that Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan has been arrested under the
Information and Communication Technology Act. The arrest was allegedly
made on the basis of a general diary filed by the police with Gulshan
police station, in relation to the fact-finding report issued by Odhikar about
the killing of 61 people during an operation carried out on May 5-6,
2013 by law enforcement agencies against Hifazat-e Islam activists at the Dhaka’s
downtown
Motijheel area. 
 
After
Odhikar released on June 10, 2013 its fact-finding report on the human rights
violations perpetrated at the Hefazot rally in Motijheel on May 5-6, 2013, the
Information Ministry sent a letter to Odhikar on July 10, 2013 asking
for the names, family names and addresses of the 61 deceased people. In its reply
letter sent to the Information Ministry on July 17, 2013, and concerned for the
security of victims' families, Odhikar requested those concerned to form
an independent impartial commission headed by a retired judge, where Odhikar is
willing to submit the names of the 61 victims killed.
 
On
August 11, 2013, at around 1.20 pm, Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan was brought
before the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate Court (CMM), where the complaint against him was read by the Public
Prosecutor. The complaint, which was only handed over to his lawyers after Mr. Adilur
Rahman Khan was presented before the Court,
was signed by the Dhaka Metropolitan Police. The police lodged two General Diaries
against him on August 10, 2013, one (General Diary number 268, dated August 10)
by the Detective Branch of Police (North) under Section 54 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure and the other (General Diary number 514, dated August 10) by
the Gulshan police station. Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan was also charged under clauses 1 and 2 of Section
57 of the Information and Communication Technology Act 2006 for publishing
false images and information and disrupting the law and order situation of the
country. The complaint also alleges that there would be reasonable suspicion
that Mr. Khan is also directly and indirectly liable for other cognizable
offences. The Public Prosecutor sought a ten-day
remand against Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan
while his lawyers sought bail. The Magistrate, Judge Amit Kumar Dey, rejected the bail petition and placed Mr.
Khan on a five-day remand for interrogation in connection with
publishing a “false report” on casualties during a crackdown on a rally by the
Islamist organisation Hefazat-e Islam on May 5-6, 2013 (See background
information). Mr. Khan was then taken back to the Office of the Detective Branch (DB) of
Dhaka Metropolitan Police at 36 Minto Road, in Dhaka.
 
Furthermore, on August 11, 2013, the Odhikar
office was searched by DB police between 8.20 pm and 9.00 pm.
They inspected the files and documents and then seized three laptops and two
CPUs from Odhikar's office.
 
On 12 August 2013, the High Court of
Bangladesh stayed the five-day remand order to interrogate Mr. Adilur Rahman
Khan and asked police to send him to jail.  A High Court vacation bench
comprised of Justice Borhanuddin and Justice Kashifa Hossain, however, allowed
the Detective Branch to interrogate Mr. Khan at the Dhaka Central Jail gate
premises, if necessary.  The court passed the order after hearing a writ
petition filed by Mr. Khan, challenging the legality of the remand order
granted by Judge Amit Kumar Dey of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate’s Court.
 
On 13 August 2013, Dhaka Metropolitan Magistrate
Mostafa Shahriar Khan, in accordance with the High Court order, issued the
order to send Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan to Dhaka Central Jail.
 
I express my
deepest concern about Mr.
Adilur Rahman Khan's arbitrary detention,
which seems to merely aim at sanctioning his peaceful human rights
activities. Accordingly, I call upon the authorities
in Bangladesh to guarantee in all circumstances his physical and psychological
integrity as well as to release him immediately and unconditionally.
 
More generally, I call upon the authorities in
Bangladesh to put an end to any kind of harassment - including
at the judicial level - against Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan and all human
rights defenders in Bangladesh; as well as to conform
with the provisions of the United Natinos Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9,
1998.
 
I thank you for your attention to
this urgent matter.
 
Sincerely yours,
 


OPEN LETTER TO H.E. Ms.
SHEIKH HASINA,
PRIME MINISTER OF BANGLADESH
 

Via Fax: +880 2 8113243
Email: info@pmo.gov.bd
 
Geneva, August 13, 2013
 
Re: Arbitrary detention of Mr. Adilur
Rahman Khan,
Secretary of Odhikar and a member of OMCT General Assembly
 
Your Excellency, 
 
The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), through the voice
of all the undersigned, members of its General Assembly, is writing to you to
express its grave concern over the arbitrary detention since
August 10, 2013 of Mr. Adilur Rahman KHAN,
Secretary of the human rights non-governmental organisation Odhikar, OMCT
network member in Bangladesh and, like us, a member of OMCT General Assembly.
Mr. Khan is also an Executive Committee Member of Forum Asia and has been the
Deputy Attorney General during the erstwhile four-party alliance
government.
 
On August 10, 2013, at 10.20 pm, Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan was
arrested by men in plain clothes who said they were of the Detective
Branch of Police (DB) as he was returning at his Gulshan residence in Dhaka
with his family. The Dhaka Metropolitan Police subsequently
confirmed the arrest to the media. 
 
On August
11, 2013, Mr. Adilur
Rahman Khan was brought before the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate Court (CMM),
where the
complaint against him was read by the Public Prosecutor. The complaint, which
was only handed over to his lawyers after Mr. Khan
was presented before the Court, was signed by the Dhaka Metropolitan Police.
The police lodged two General Diaries against him on August 10, 2013, one
(General Diary number 268) by the Detective Branch of Police (North) under
Section 54 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and the other (General Diary
number 514) by the Gulshan police station. Mr. Khan
was also charged under clauses 1 and 2 of Section 57 of the Information and
Communication Technology Act 2006 for publishing false images and information
and disrupting the law and order situation of the country, in relation to a
fact-finding report issued by Odhikar about the killing of 61 people during an
operation carried out on May 5-6, 2013 by law enforcement agencies against Hefazat-e Islam activists at the Dhaka’s downtown
Motijheel area.
The complaint also alleged that there would be reasonable suspicion that Mr.
Khan is also directly and indirectly liable for other cognizable offences. 
 
The Public Prosecutor sought a ten-day remand against Mr. Adilur
Rahman Khan while his lawyers sought bail. The Magistrate, Judge Amit Kumar Dey, rejected the bail
petition and
placed Mr. Khan on a five-day remand for interrogation. Mr. Khan was then taken back to the Office of the Detective Branch
(DB) of Dhaka Metropolitan Police at 36 Minto Road, in Dhaka. 
Furthermore, on August 11, 2013,
the Odhikar office was searched by DB police between 8.20 pm and
9.00 pm. They inspected the files and documents and then seized three laptops
and two CPUs from Odhikar's office.
 
On 12 August 2013, the High Court of Bangladesh stayed
the five-day remand order to interrogate Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan and asked
police to send him to jail.  A High Court vacation bench comprised of Justice
Borhanuddin and Justice Kashifa Hossain, however, allowed the Detective Branch
to interrogate Mr. Khan at the Dhaka Central Jail gate premises, if necessary.
 The court passed the order after hearing a writ petition filed by Mr. Khan, challenging
the legality of the remand order granted by Judge Amit Kumar Dey of the Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate’s Court. 
 
The World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT), the leading global network of
civil society organisations against torture, summary executions, enforced
disappearances and all other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment in the world, is concerned that the detention of Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan directly results from his exercise of universally
recognised human rights, in particular the right to freedom of expression and
freedom of association (which includes the right, individually or in
association with others, to promote and protect human rights). Those rights are
protected under the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (Article 20), the United
Nations Declaration on the Rights and Responsibilities to Promote and Protect
Universally Recognised Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Article 19 and Article
22). 
 
As members of OMCT General
Assembly, we are concerned that Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan’s detention only aims at sanctioning and preventing his activities as a human rights defender, therefore contradicting international human rights standards and
Bangladesh’s obligations. 
 
Accordingly, we respectfully urge Your Excellency to guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
of Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan, to fully ensure safeguards against torture and ill treatment
during his detention and interrogation as well as to release
him immediately
and unconditionally. In the meantime, please guarantee Mr.
Khan’s full access to his lawyers and family, as well as to an independent
medical counsel. We also ask you to permit access to international observers.
 
We hope that the
concerns expressed in this letter will receive the attention they deserve and
we would welcome your prompt responses on these matters. 
 
Yours sincerely,
 



Yves Berthelot
President


Gerald Staberock
Secretary General



 
Members of OMCT General Assembly
 
ABU AL-ZULOF George
ALAYZA Ernesto
ARRIAGA Luis
ASSAF Georges
BENABDESSELAM Abdel-ilah
BODNAR Adam
CANTON Santiago Alejandro
CHUKWUMA Innocent
De MESA Teodoro
DIALLO Oumar
DIEYE Aminata
DIMITRAS Panayote
DOEK E. Jaap
DOUGAN BEACA José
DUTOUR Nassera
GHAEMI Hadi
GOMEZ ZULUAGA Alberto L.
GROVER Vrinda
HARRIS Theresa
JENDOUBI Kamel
KHIDASHELI Tinatin
MARTY Dick
MASIKA BIHAMBA Justine
MEDRANO AMADOR Celia
MESSAOUD Boubacar
MOHOCHI Sam
O’CONNOR Florizelle
O’FLAHERTY Michael
PALMIERI Gustavo
QUIROGA CARRILLO Jahel
SABER Karim
SADOVSKAYA Olga
SAMAYOA Claudia
SHIRAISHI Osamu
TIPHAGNE Henri
TRAVIS Anthony
TRIFI Mokhtar
XIA Renee
YUNUS Leyla
 
 
Copies
to:
-       H.E. Mr. Muhiuddin Khan
Alamgir, Minister for Home Affairs, via Email: mkalamgir@yahoo.com; minister@mha.gov.bd;
-       Barrister Shafique Ahmed, Minister for Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, via Email: info@minlaw.gov.bd
-       Mr. Hasanul Haq Inu, Minister of Information, via E-mail: minister@moi.gov.bd
-      
H.E. Dr. Dipu Moni, Minister of Foreign Affairs, via Fax: 9562188 & 7171433 and Email: fm@mofa.gov.bd; dr.dipumoni@gmail.com; shanchitahaque@yahoo.com
-       Mr. Hasan Mahmud
Khandaker, Inspector General of Police, via Email: ig@police.gov.bd 
-      
Dr. Mizanur Rahman, Chairperson, National Human
Rights Commission Bangladesh, via  Fax: +88 028333219 and Email: nhrc.bd@gmail.com
-      
H.E. Mr. Abdul Hannan,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh to the
United Nations in Geneva, via Fax: +41 22 738 46 16 and E-mail: mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.int 