Guatemala:  Guatemala: rape and intimidation of the members of  a women’s organisation
November  2, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Guatemala / 2000 / NovemberGuatemala: Guatemala: rape and intimidation of the members of  a women’s organisationCase GTM 021100 VAW VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Guatemala.    Brief description of the Situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by reliable sources of the rape and intimidation of the members of  the women’s organisation Associacion Mujer Vamos Adelante (AMVA) on 24 October 2000 at 11 p.m in Guatemala. AMVA fights for the development and the well-being of women and against violence against women.  According to the information received, the raid of the headquarters of AMVA was committed by five armed men who entered the building under the excuse of looking for training. Inside, the attackers forced the members of the organisation to give them their bags. The around 15 victims were forced with aggression to go into one room, where they were locked in. The attackers took the pants of  the computer technician and then tied his hands and feet tight enough to interrupt the blood circulation.   While the victims were locked in, the attackers vomited, urinated and spat in the offices. They stole all the computers containing valuable information.   According to the information, when the victims thought that the attackers had left, they came back and grabbed a young woman who they intended to rape. She said that she had her period, and she was forced to show this to them. Subsequently they grabbed another young woman and raped her.   This attack was allegedly carried out over a substantial period of time.  It is also noted that the offices are just two blocks away from a police station of the Civil National Police. When the attackers left, the members of the organisation called the Civil National Police and the Public Prosecutor.   It took  a long time for both the police and the public prosecutor to come to the offices.   The International Secretariat expresses its grave concern over the reports of repressive treatment of female human rights defenders in Guatemala. (see also the urgent action GTM005/011/OBS/112 of the Observatory for  the protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the FIDH and the OMCT.)   Action requested  Please write to the authorities of Guatemala urging them to :  i.	guarantee the security and the physical and psychological integrity of the members of the AMVA, and ensure them the right to adequate reparation;  ii.	carry out an impartial and exhaustive inquiry into these facts, bring those responsible before a competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and administrative sanctions provided by law;  iii.	adopt immediate measures to put an end to the repressive treatment of human rights defenders, in particular female human rights defenders;  iv.	ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses   S.E. Alfonso Antonio Portillo Cabrera, Presidente de la República de Guatemala, Palacio Nacional, Guatemala, Guatemala. Fax : + 502 221 45 37 or 334 16 15 or 230-1508  E-mail : secgralp@infovia.com.gt  Sr. Guillermo Ruiz Wong, Ministro de Gobernación, Ministerio de Gobernación, Palacio Nacional, 6 Calle y 7 Avenida, Guatemala, Guatemala. Fax : + 502 362 02 39  Sr. Procurador de Derechos Humanos, 12 Avenida 12-72, Zona 1, Guatemala, Guatemala. Fax : + 502 238 17 34  Lic. Adolfo González Rodas, Fiscal General de la Nación, Ministerio Público, 6 Av 3-11, Zona 4, Guatemala. Guatemala. Fax : + 502 331 4336  Presidencia Comisión Presidencial de Derechos Humanos (Copredeh) E-mail : copredeh@guate.net  Geneva, 2 November 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 