Libya:  Libyan public institutions and NGOs draft ‘10 Steps to End Torture’
April 25, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionEvents / Libya / 2013 / AprilLibya: Libyan public institutions and NGOs draft ‘10 Steps to End Torture’ARABIC_  Libyan public institutions and NGOs draft ‘10 Steps to End Torture’9 pages / 19.32 MB

PRESS RELEASE
 
For
Immediate Release
Thursday,
April 25, 2013
 
 
Libyan public
institutions and NGOs draft ‘10 Steps to End Torture’
 
 
TRIPOLI, Libya – On Saturday,
20 April 2013, the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) assembled 48 participants
from across Libya for a day-long workshop entitled, “Uniting public
institutions and civil society to monitor and implement the new law against
torture: challenges and prospects.” Participants included representatives from
the Ministry of Justice, the General National Congress (GNC), the National
Council for Civil Liberties and Human Rights (NCCLHR), and many lawyers and
activists from Tripoli, Benghazi, Misrata, and Sabha.
 
The participants drafted and
approved a memorandum entitled, “10 Steps to End Torture,” intended to guide
the Ministry of Justice, the GNC, and civil society in monitoring and improving
the law. The day ended with a pledge to reunite after one month to mobilize a
national coalition against torture. Ms. Samira Bouslama, Civil Society
Coordinator at the UN Support Mission in Libya, said, “Interaction and dialogue
between civil society and public actors is the key to protecting against
torture in Libya. This workshop was a big step in that direction.”
 
The workshop followed the
GNC’s adoption on 9 April 2013 of a bill – initiated by the Ministry of Justice
– criminalizing torture, enforced disappearances, and discrimination. The
purpose of the workshop was thus to direct the momentum of the moment toward
the law’s implementation. Participants agreed that the law sends a clear
message that torture and ill treatment will not be tolerated, but that further amendments
and mechanisms are necessary to create a comprehensive legal framework against
torture. They further praised the law’s adoption in the face of considerable
opposition to the bill and the tenuous politics of the day.
 
The day began with a
presentation from Ms. Marieke Wierda, Senior Transitional Justice Officer at
UNSMIL, who discussed the definition of torture and how to align local and
international laws. Next, Mr. Mondher Cherni, Secretary-General of the Tunisian
Organisation Against Torture, shared the Tunisian experience in reinforcing
national legislation against torture following the revolution. Then, Mr. Issam
Al Tagouri, Civil Society Coordinator at the Ministry of Justice, spoke about steps
taken by the Ministry to improve detention conditions and transfer informal
detention facilities to the state. Finally, Mr. Faraj A. Elajely, Director of Human
Rights Field Operations at the NCCLHR, closed the morning session with a
discourse on the obstacles preventing victims from accessing justice and fair
compensation in Libya. The afternoon session saw an animated discussion on the
gravity and complexity of torture, detention, and discrimination in Libya. About
8,000 detainees are being arbitrarily held in informal prisons outside of state
control. About as many bodies are lying unidentified in over 200 mass graves
across the country. Certain participants enriched the debate with the perspectives
and concerns of diverse populations, including the Tawergha and women. 
 
Mr. Currun Singh, Regional
Advisor at OMCT, said, “The energy of the room was palpable. Libyans have
waited long enough and are now thirsty for rule of law. Unchecked violence is
still touching hundreds of thousands of victims and families more than two years
after the revolution began. But after what I saw today, there is cautious cause
for optimism.” 
 
Mr. Elajely of NCCLHR said, “There
is a vital need in Libya that we work together with civil society during the
transition process. I thank OMCT for this workshop and I support the initiative
to create a coalition of NGOs against torture in Libya.” 
 
OMCT has been active in Libya
ever since the Abu Salim prison massacre in 1996, which it brought to the attention
of the Human Rights Committee of the United Nations. Since the revolution, it has
been accompanying civil society in fighting against torture and supporting
legal reforms. 
 
~
 
See a photo reel and read the ‘10
Steps to End Torture’ on the following pages.
 
This workshop was organized with the generous
support of the European Union.   

 

 
For
more information, contact:
 
Currun
Singh                                                   Karim Salem
MENA
Advisor                                              Project
Coordinator
Email:
cs@omct.org                                        Email: ks@omct.org 
Tel: +216 71 322 561 / +41
228 094 939       Tel: +216 71 322 561             / +41 228 094 939 
 
 
Created in 1985, the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) is today the main coalition of
international NGOs fighting against torture, summary executions, enforced
disappearances and all other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. With 311
affiliated organisations in its SOS-Torture Network and tens of thousands of
correspondents in every country, OMCT is the strongest network of NGOs working to
protect and promote human rights around the world. For more information, visit
us at www.omct.org, on Facebook or Twitter.
 
10 Steps to End Torture                                                             
 
Recommendations from the Workshop, “Uniting Public    Institutions    and    Civil    Society    to Monitor    and    Implement    the    New    Law    Against    Torture:    Challenges    and    Prospects”
 
Saturday, 20 April 2013
 
Today’s workshop has tackled different axes
of discussion, including the role and mandate of public institutions in the
fight against torture, preventing torture through national, regional and
international law, and the state of human rights in Libya. Drawing on our
experiences, we discussed current practices of enforced disappearance,
arbitrary arrest, torture, ill treatment, and discrimination, notably at
detention facilities outside state control. We note that public institutions
are finding it difficult to hold accountable perpetrators of such grave
violations and bring them to fair trial. We also believe civil society has a
role to play in assisting victims, raising public awareness, and engaging
vigorously with public actors. We raised the issue of the independence of
judicial power and the need to stop immediately the practice of torture within
formal and informal detention facilities in Libya. Finally, we recognize that
detention facilities that have been transferred under the control of the
Ministry of Justice have witnessed an amelioration of detention conditions and
fewer human rights violations. We thus urge the transitional government to
bring, immediately, all detention facilities under the control of the Ministry
of Justice.
 
We issue the following ‘10 Steps to End
Torture’, for all to take heed:
 
1. To implement the new law criminalizing
torture within a legal framework that guarantees full protection to victims and
protection from such violations in the future;
 
2. To legislate in the national framework
that amnesties, immunities or periods of prescription are not possible for such
human rights violations and crimes;
 
3. To align the national legal framework with
Libya’s international obligations and human rights standards, notably the UN
Convention Against Torture (CAT);
 
4. To put in place governmental programs for
the compensation and rehabilitation of torture victims;
 
5. To ratify the Optional Protocol of the
International Convention Against Torture in order to assure prevention and
control mechanisms;
 
6. To transfer all detention facilities under
the full control of the Ministry of Justice and to guarantee regular and
unannounced prison visits from public institutions and civil society;
 
7. To transfer all cases to public
prosecutors in order to verify charges against prisoners and to release persons
who have been detained without charge or evidence;
 
8. To create a register for all detention
facilities that should include names of the detained, their arrival date, and
their charges;
 
9. To stop immediately all human rights
violations against detained persons in informal prisons and initiate their
transfer under the authority of the Ministry of Justice;
 
10. To reform judicial power and guarantee
fair trial and investigation of all cases of torture that have been perpetrated
in Libya.
 
 
Made in Tripoli, 20 April 2013
 
1. Voluntary Libyan Group for
Monitoring Human Rights Violations, Tripoli 
2. Jurists Without Borders,
Benghazi 
3. Al Rahma Association, Tawergha
4. Al Sabeel Association, Tripoli
5. Almorageb Human Rights
Association, Tripoli
6. Libyan Judges’ Association,
Benghazi 
7. Libyan Youth Association for
Human Rights, Benghazi 
8. Libyan Organization for Human
Rights, Tripoli
9. Libyan Observatory for Human
Rights, Tripoli
10. Libyan Institute to Support
Rights and Liberties, Tripoli11. Liberties Group for Human
Rights and Development, Tripoli12. World Organisation Against
Torture, TripoliThis document
has been produced with the financial assistance of the European Union.
The contents of
this document are the sole responsibility of the World Organisation Against
Torture and can under no circumstances be regarded as reflecting the position
of the European Union. 