Uruguay:  Violence against children remains a major concern
November  6, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Statements / Uruguay / 2013 / NovemberUruguay: Violence against children remains a major concern
Geneva-Montevideo,
October 2013. The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), its local partner
in Uruguay, the Institute for Legal and Social Studies (IELSUR), together with the Committee on the
Rights of the Child of Uruguay, and the
international expert Eric Sottas, have conducted a Monitoring and Advocacy Mission
in Uruguay from 30 September to 05 October 2013. 
Through monitoring visits and
interviews with employees of juvenile detention centres, OMCT has received several
allegations of violence against children in conflict with the law. Among the
allegations, children have claimed to be repeatedly beaten and humiliated,
forced to run naked in the patio, excessively medicated and kept in their cells
for more than 20 hours a day. 
OMCT notices that despite
improvements, noticed in comparison with previous missions in the country, such
as the access to education to some of the children deprived of liberty, as well
as improvements in the physical structure of some centres and initiatives to
build new centres; allegations of ill-treatment of children continue to emerge
with complete impunity.
In order to go further in the
discussion of preventive measures against torture, OMCT and its local partners,
with the organizational support of the Government of Uruguay, conducted a
training to directors and employees of Juvenile Detention Centres. 
The training counted with local and
international experts from different organizations and had the presence of over
60 employees and directors of the different Juvenile Centres of the country.
The discussion raised issues such as
obligations that government representatives hold in relation to international
human rights standards, as well as limitations on the use of force. 
As a conclusion of the mission, OMCT
and its local partners promoted a Seminary to discuss the initiative to reduce
the age of criminal responsibility, that counted with the presence of students
and experts in the subject. 
OMCT notices that in the past few
years Uruguay has harden its law on children, approving initiatives that go
against international standards, and generating an abusive use of measures of
deprivation of liberty, which has resulted in overcrowded centres and the
increase of violations.  
We recall that the deprivation of liberty of children should always be a
measure of last resort, for the minimum necessary period, and always taking
into account the best interest of the child. In addition, all allegations of
torture must be object of a meaningful, diligent, impartial and transparent
investigation in order to ensure full accountability. 
OMCT and its local partners expect
to continue a dialogue with the government of Uruguay in order to promote
concrete actions that may ensure prevention and accountability for practices of
torture, inhuman and degrading treatment against children in conflict with the
law. 