Sudan:  Sudan: arrest and harassment of women activists
June  6, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2003 / JuneSudan: Sudan: arrest and harassment of women activistsCase SDN 060603.VAW Violence Against Women Arrest and harassment of Women Activists / Suspension of Women’s NGO  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sudan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudanese Organisation against Torture (SOAT), a member of the OMCT network, of the arrest and harassment of Women Activists in Sudan.  According to the information received, five officers from the Sudanese National Security Agency (NSA) arrested 38 women from the Nuba Mountain Women’s Association and 3 men who accompanied them as they were departing for a women’s conference for peace and development in Kawda town, Nuba Mountain at 10:30 am on Monday June 2nd, 2003.  The conference participants began their journey from the ‘Awda district in Omdurman only to be intercepted at Kalakala in Southern Khartoum, where they were met by 6 NSA pick- up trucks and 2 cars with tinted windows. The NSA officers, armed with kalashnikov rifles and pistols arrested the delegates and transported them to the NSA offices in Kalakala East, where they were searched in an antagonistic manner and insulted verbally. Following this, they were interrogated regarding their movements, the intentions of their trip and any relations they may have had with the Sudanese People’s Liberation Movement (SPLA).  Eight conference delegates were then transported to the NSA offices in Omdurman (near Omdurman Traffic Police Station) where they were forced to sign a declaration promising that they would not leave Khartoum without the permission of the NSA. A number of personal items were confiscated from the group-including mobile phones, computer equipment, documents and diaries containing private details of contacts. In addition to this, a sum of approximately 8 million Sudanese pounds was confiscated and the delegates were made to sit on the floor for an hour in the hot sun.   The following people were released at 9pm on Monday June 2nd, 2003, but ordered to report to the NSA offices in Omdurman on a daily basis, from 8am in the morning until 8pm in the evening: Huda Dawood (f); Huwaida Bashir Kumi (f); Ja’fariya Bashina (f); E’timaad Faqih Ali (f); Samir Abdallah (m).   The following people were taken to the Khartoum NSA offices until they were finally released at 2am on the morning of June 3rd, 2003, but also ordered to remain in Khartoum and to report to the NSA offices daily: Zeinab Balnadiya (f), President of the Ruayya Association, Jumm’a Durman (f), Camilla (f). They continue to do so.  The remaining members of the Nuba Mountain Women’s Association were released from the NSA offices in Kalakala at 2am on the morning of June 3rd, 2003. The offices of the Ruayya Women’s Organisation in Al-'Awda, which was the initial meeting-point for the delegation’s trip, has since been closed down by the NSA.   OMCT condemns the continuing restrictions on the freedom of association in Sudan and the harassment of women’s human rights activists.     Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:  i.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events,  in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; ii.	guarantee adequate reparation to the afore-mentioned women, including the restitution of the confiscated belongings;  iii.	guarantee freedom of association in general and of women’s human rights activists in particular; iv.	ratify the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women; v.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.   Addresses  ·	His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, People’s Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: + 24911 783223 ·	Mr Ali Osman Yassin, Minister of Justice and Attorney General, Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 24911 788941 ·	Mr Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: 24911 779383 ·	Dr Yasir Sid Ahmed, Advisory Council for Human Rights, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: + 24911 770883 ·	His Excellency Ambassador Mr Ibrahim Mirghani Ibrahim, Permanent Mission of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 335, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax : +4122 7312656. E-mail: mission.sudan@ties.itu.int   Please also write to the embassies of Sudan in your respective country.  Geneva, June 6th, 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 