Kyrgyzstan:  29th Session Human Rights Council: Statement for UPR Outcomes: Kyrgyzstan
June 24, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Kyrgyzstan / 2015 / JuneKyrgyzstan: 29th Session Human Rights Council: Statement for UPR Outcomes: Kyrgyzstan2015.06.24_Statement_Kyrgyzstan_UPR1 page / 107 KB

HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL
29th session – June 24, 2015
Item 6: UPR Outcomes: Kyrgyzstan
 
 
Oral
statement delivered by the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), within the framework
of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders.
 
 
Mr.
President,
 
 
OMCT and
FIDH welcome the report of the working group on the UPR on Kyrgyzstan.
 
The
Observatory has been documenting and denouncing the regional trend of tabling
and adopting laws restricting or repressing the exercise of freedom of association. Kyrgyzstan is
unfortunately no exception as bills establishing registration as "foreign
agents" and restricting foreign funding among others, are currently being
debated. The UN, the Venice Commission of the Council of Europe and other
international and Kyrgyz organisations have already expressed their
concerns in this regard. It is also worth mentioning the ongoing harassment of
the human rights organisation Bir Duino which we fear is related to its
monitoring of the case of Azimjon Askarov. 
 
We welcome
the acceptance by Kyrgyzstan of eight recommendations explicitly addressing the
respect of the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association and we encourage authorities to
translate these commitments into genuine and effective reforms that fully
guarantee them. In a regional context in which various States have been
restricting these rights, Kyrgyzstan has the opportunity to dramatically improve
its international reputation by standing out as a State that fulfils its
international commitments. This opportunity should not be missed.
 
Furthermore, the Observatory
is very concerned by the rejection of most of the recommendations calling for
the adoption of legislation prohibiting discrimination based on sexual orientation. The draft law
banning the “propaganda of non-traditional sexual relations" is inherently
discriminatory and infringing freedom of expression, assembly and other
fundamental rights. It should therefore be dropped if Kyrgyzstan's human rights
commitments are to be taken seriously. The bill contributes to the general
intensification of harassment against the LGBTI community and its supporters.
The recent assault in May 2015 against participants to an anti-homophobia event
organised by Labris is a good example of this.
 
We would
like to conclude by encouraging Mr. Maina Kiai to make use of Kyrgyzstan's
invitation to visit the country during this critical time for the right to
freedom of association in the country.
 
 
We thank you
Mr President. 