Philippines:  Alleged extrajudicial killing of Mr. Nicanor Herrera Mariano by members of the Philippine Army, in Bulacan Province
July 27, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2011 / JulyPhilippines: Alleged extrajudicial killing of Mr. Nicanor Herrera Mariano by members of the Philippine Army, in Bulacan ProvinceCase PHL 270711
Alleged extrajudicial killing/ Risk of impunity
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in
the following situation in the Philippines.
Brief description of
the situation
The International Secretariat
of OMCT has been informed by the Task Force Detainees of the Philippines
(TFDP), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the killing of Mr. Nicanor Herrera Mariano, a 46-year-old
farmer from Sitio Suapong, as a result of a shooting by members of the
Philippine Army (PA), believed to be from the 56th Infantry
Battalion[1].
His son, Mr. Norman Esquibel Mariano,
18 years old, was reportedly severely injured during the events, which occurred
in Doña Remedios Tirinidad, in Bulacan Province. 
According to the information
received, on 18 July 2011, Mr. Nicanor Herrera Mariano and his son, Mr. Norman Esquibel Mariano, along with Ms. Florita Verceles
Esquibel (respectively Mr. Nicanor Herrera Mariano’s mother and Mr. Norman Esquibel
Mariano’s grand-mother), went to Sitio Batong Munti, in Barangay (village)
Camachili to do “Kaingin” (an old practice of burning trees for cultivation and
to produce charcoal). The three stayed there overnight. At around 4:30 am on 19 July 2011, they were
reportedly awakened by blaring sounds caused by several gunshots fired at the
nipa hut (an indigenous house used in the Philippines), where they were sleeping. Ms. Florita Verceles Esquibel
reportedly shouted that civilians were in the hut and urged to stop the
shooting. After a soldier asked them to get out of the hut, she went out and
saw around 20 armed soldiers in full battle gear. The soldiers reportedly then
asked where her companions were and she responded that they were inside. On the
order of the soldiers, Mr. Norman Esquibel Mariano managed to get out of the
hut with the help of his grand-mother despite gunshot wounds, but his father,
Mr. Nicanor Herrera Mariano, did not move. The soldiers immediately approached
Mr. Norman Esquibel Mariano and an unidentified army officer reportedly told
Ms. Florita Verceles Esquibel that her grandson was a member of the New
People’s Army (NPA), which she denied. She explained that they are farmers and
they were on the mentioned site for the “Kaingin”. At the same time, one of the
soldiers went inside the hut and reported that Mr. Nicanor Herrera Mariano was
dead. The soldiers then reportedly instantly pointed their automatic rifles to
the air and started to fire for about one minute. 
According to the same information received, Ms.
Florita Verceles Esquibel was only allowed to leave the place around three
hours after the shooting occurred, and without her grandson, whom the army kept
under their custody. She went to search for help but the Barangay officials were
refused access to the site by the soldiers. It is reported that the soldiers
only brought Mr. Norman Esquibel Mariano to the hospital at around 5:00 pm that same day. He was later transferred to
Fort Bonifacio General Hospital, which is located inside an army camp in Taguig City, without the consent of the family. He
stayed there a few days before he was transferred to East Avenue Medical Center in Quezon City. He would be no longer under military
custody. 
The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely
concerned about the aforementioned events which resulted in the killing of Mr. Nicanor Herrera
Mariano, and injuring his son,
Mr. Norman Esquibel
Mariano. OMCT recalls to the Philippines authorities that they have to fulfil their
obligations under international human rights law to protect the right to life
and to bringing to justice those responsible for violating this right.
OMCT urges the
competent authorities to carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial
investigation into the aforementioned events, in particular the
killing of Mr. Nicanor Herrera Mariano, the result of which must be made
public, in order to bring those responsible before a competent, independent and
impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as
provided by law.
OMCT is
also gravely concerned about the safety of Mr.
Nicanor
Herrera Mariano’s family, and calls on
the competent authorities to guarantee, in all circumstances, its
physical and psychological integrity.
Actions Requested
Please write to the
authorities in the Philippines urging them to:
i.                    
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Nicanor Herrera
Mariano’s family; 
ii.                  
Carry out a
prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into
the aforementioned events, in particular the killing of Mr. Nicanor Herrera Mariano, the result of which must be made public,
in orderto bring those responsible
before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil
and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;
iii.                 
Ensure that adequate, effective and prompt
reparation, including adequate compensation, is granted to the victim’s family;
iv.                
Guarantee
the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country
in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
Ø      H.E. Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Republic of the Philippines,
Malacaang Palace, JP Laurel St., San Miguel, Manila, Philippines, Fax: (+632) 736 1010, E-mail: corres@op.gov.ph / opnet@ops.gov.ph
Ø      Sec. Teresita Quintos-Deles, Presidential Adviser on
the Peace Process, Office of the Presidential
Adviser on the Peace Process (OPAPP), 7th
Floor Agustin Building I, Emerald Avenue,
Pasig City 1605, Fax:+63 (2) 638 2216, E-Mail Address: feedback@opapp.net
Ø      Ret. Lt. Gen. Voltaire T. Gazmin, Secretary,
Department of National Defense, Room 301 DND
Building, Camp Emilio Aguinaldo, E. de los
Santos Avenue, Quezon City, Fax:+63(2) 911 6193, Email:
osnd@philonline.com
Ø      Atty. Leila M. De Lima, Secretary, Department of
Justice, Padre Faura St., Manila, Direct Line 521-8344; 5213721, Trunkline 523-84-81 loc.214, Fax: (+632) 523-9548, Email: doj.delima@gmail.com
Ø      Hon. Loretta Ann P. Rosales, Chairperson, Commission on Human Rights, SAAC
Bldg., UP Complex, Commonwealth Avenue, Diliman,
Quezon City, Philippines, Fax: (+632) 929 0102, Email:
crosales.chr@gmail.com 
Ø      Permanent Mission
of the Philippines to the United Nations in Geneva, 47 Avenue Blanc, 1202
Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 716 19
32, Email: mission.philippines@ties.itu.int
Please also write to the embassies of the Philippines in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 27 July 2011
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.



[1] The 56th Infantry Battalion is based in Bulacan Province. 