Iran:  Mr. Kouhyar Goudarzi sentenced to five years' imprisonment on appeal
September 19, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2012 / SeptemberIran: Mr. Kouhyar Goudarzi sentenced to five years' imprisonment on appeal


URGENT
APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
New information
IRN 006 / 0811 / OBS 108.3
Arbitrary detention / 
Judicial harassment
Iran
September
18, 2012
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Iran. 
 
New
information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by the Iranian League for
the Defence of Human Rights (LDDHI) about the confirmation on
appeal of the sentence of five years' imprisonment in internal exile against
Mr. Kouhyar
Goudarzi, a member of the Committee of Human Rights
Reporters (CHRR).
 
According to the
information received, on September 15, 2012, the Tehran Province Court
of Appeals upheld the sentence of five years’ imprisonment in internal exile
that had been issued against Mr. Goudarzi on February 26, 2012 on charges of
“propaganda against the system” and “assembly and collusion against the state”
(see background information)[1]. This
verdict now places Mr. Goudarzi at risk of arbitrary arrest at any moment.
 
 Mr. Goudarzi’s lawyer, Dr. Alizadeh
Tabatabaei, said on September 15, 2012, that the appeals judge had told him that he would issue an
acquittal verdict. However, the Ministry of Intelligence, which was in favour
of a sentence against Mr. Goudarzi, exerted its influence on the decision.
 
The Observatory recalls
that the Iranian legislation does not provide for “imprisonment in internal
exile”, i.e. a sentence to be served in a remote location within the country,
far from the detainee's hometown.
 
The
Observatory denounces this new arbitrary verdict against Mr. Kouhyar Goudarzi
since it seems to merely aim at sanctioning his legitimate human rights
activities, amid the continuing repression of the Iranian civil society.
 
The
Observatory further recalls that several other human rights defenders have also
been detained and faced acts of judicial harassment over the past months,
including Ms. Shiva
Nazarahari and Messrs. Saeed Jalalifar and Navid Khanjani,
members of the CHRR, as well as Messrs. Hossein Ronaghi Maleki, blogger and human rights activist, Issa Saharkhiz, a
journalist and founding member of the Iranian Association for the Defence of
Freedom of Press, and Ms. Zhila Baniyaghoub, an award-winning journalist and women's right
activist[2].
 
The
Observatory is all the more concerned about the fate of Mr. Kouhyar Goudarzi that
in early September 2012, Ms. Shiva Nazarahari and Ms. Zhila Baniyaghoub were
taken into custody to serve the imprisonment sentences that had been previously
imposed on them on similar charges.
 
Background information:
 
Mr. Kouhyar Goudarzi was arrested in December 2009 and subsequently
sentenced to one year in prison on charges, among others, of “propaganda
activity against the system through effective collaboration with the Committee
of Human Rights Reporters website”, “collection and publication of biased news
against the system and transfer of this information to terrorist organisations
based abroad”, as well as “interviews with foreign media and publishing
articles in websites,” pursuant to Islamic Penal Code of Iran. He served the
sentence and was released on December 14, 2010[3]. On July 30 or 31, 2011, Mr. Goudarzi was again arrested in Tehran and
his whereabouts remained unknown for several weeks, which amounted to enforced
disappearance. A day after his arrest, in the morning of July 31 or August 1,
2011, his mother Ms. Parvin Mokhtar’e was also arbitrarily arrested at her home
in Kerman, by four plainclothes agents, without a warrant. While in detention,
she was informed that she had been accused of “insulting the Supreme leader”, “propaganda
against the regime”, and “acting against national security”, whereas she had no
political or human rights-related activities. In December 2011, after spending
nearly five months in Kerman prison, she was sentenced to 23 months’
imprisonment on charges of “assembly, collusion, and spreading propaganda
against the State” by the Kerman Islamic Revolution Court. On appeal, the
sentence was reduced to 23 months of suspended imprisonment. She was also
sentenced to a cash fine for “insulting the martyrs”, which she paid, before
being released on March 18, 2012.
 
On February 26, 2012, Mr. Kouhyar Goudarzi was sentenced by Branch 26
of the Islamic Revolution Court to five years’ imprisonment to be served in
internal exile in the remote southeastern city of Zabul. He was convicted on
charges of “propaganda against the system” because of an interview he gave to the
German magazine Der Spiegel, in which he spoke
about his hunger strike in solidarity with prisoners and his former cellmates.
He was also convicted on charges of  “assembly
and collusion against the system”. Although he lodged an appeal, he remained
detained in Section 209 of Evin prison under the control of the Ministry of
Intelligence.
 
On April 12, 2012, after spending more than nine months in
detention including two months in solitary confinement, Mr. Goudarzi was released on bail pending his trial on
appeal.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write to the Iranian authorities and ask them to:
 
i.              
Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Kouhyar Goudarzi and of
the aforementioned six human rights defenders, as well as all human rights defenders in Iran;
 
ii.             
Put
an end to any kind of harassment - including at the judicial level -
against  Mr. Kouhyar Goudarzi as well as against
the aforementioned six human rights defenders, and more generally against all human rights defenders in Iran;
 
iii.           
Release
all the aforementioned six
human rights defenders immediately and unconditionally, as their detention only
aims at sanctioning their human rights activities;
 
iv.            
Conform
in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly,
in particular:
-     
its
article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually or in
association with others, to promote the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-     
its
article 5.b, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, at the national and international levels, (…) to form,
join and participate in non-governmental organizations, associations or
groups”;
-     
its
article 12.2 which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures
to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually
and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary
action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights
referred to in the present Declaration”; 
 
v.             
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards
and international instruments ratified by Iran.
 
Addresses:
 
·  Leader of the Islamic Republic, His Excellency
Ayatollah Sayed Ali Khamenei, The Office of the Supreme Leader, Shahid
Keshvardoost St., Jomhuri Eslami Ave., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran,
E-Mail: info_leader@leader.ir, Faxes: + 98 21 649, + 98 21 649 / 21 774 2228, info_leader@leader.ir
·  President Mr. Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, the Presidency,
Palestine Avenue, Azerbaijan Intersection, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran,
Fax: + 98 21 649 5880. E-Mail: dr-ahmadinejad@president.ir
·  Head of the Judiciary, His Excellency Ayatollah Sadeq
Larijani, , Office of the Head of the Judiciary, Pasteur Street, Vali
Asr Avenue, south of Serah-e Jomhouri, Tehran, 1316814737,Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: +98 21 879
6671 / +98 21 3 311 6567, Email: bia.judi@yahoo.com / info@dadgostary-tehran.ir / info@bia-judiciary.ir
·  Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ali Akbar Salehi,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Sheikh Abdolmajid Kushk-e Mesri  Av, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax:
+98-21-66743149 
·  Secretary
General, High Council for Human Rights, Mr. Mohammed Javad Larijani, [Care of]
Office of the Head of the Judicary, Pasteur St, Vali Asr Ave, South of Serah-e
Jomhouri, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Email: info@humanrights-iran.ir
·  H.E. Mr. Seyed Mohammad Reza Sajjadi, Ambassador,
Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Chemin du Petit-Saconnex 28,
1209 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7330203, Email: mission.iran@ties.itu.int
·  Embassy of Iran in Brussels, 15 a avenue Franklin
Roosevelt, 1050 Bruxelles, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 762 39 15. Email: iran-embassy@yahoo.com 
 
Please also write to the diplomatic representations of Iran
in your respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, September 18, 2012
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code
of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH
venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to
offer them concrete support in their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the
emergency line:
·      
E-mail:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33
(0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·     
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1]                See
Observatory Urgent Appeal IRN 006 /
0811 / OBS 108.2, issued on April 19, 2012.


[2]                See Observatory Press Release, issued on September
11, 2012


[3]                
While in prison, Mr. Goudarzi was awarded the 2010
John Aubuchon Press Freedom Award by the US National Press Club in August
2010. 