Philippines:  Philippines: abduction, torture and extra-judicial execution of members of political parties, including two children
October  7, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2003 / OctoberPhilippines: Philippines: abduction, torture and extra-judicial execution of members of political parties, including two childrenCase PHL 031003 / PHL 031003.CC Urgent Appeal / Child Concern Torture / Extra-judicial execution / Ill-treatment / Impunity   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Philippines.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by KARAPATAN (Alliance for the Advancement of People’s Rights), a member of the OMCT network, of the torture and Extra-judicial execution of four members of the Anakbayan organisation and Anak ng Bayan party, two of whom are children, as well as the abduction and ill-treatment of a Bayan Muna Cebu regional coordinator, Philippines.  Anakbayan is a mass organization composed of youths and students (as well as community youth) and is a member organization of Bayan (Bagong Alyansang Makabayan or the New Patriotic Alliance) an umbrella organization of progressive groups in the Philippines. Anak ng Bayan is a newly established political party of Anakbayan, which intends to participate in next year's elections and garner a seat as Partylist representative  (similarly, Bayan Muna has been established by Bayan as its political party).  According to the information received, on September 19th, 2003, at about 3:30 in the afternoon, Lito Doydoy (male age 24, Community Organizer of Anakbayan), Marjorie Reynoso (female age 18, Municipal Coordinator of Anak ng Bayan), Jonathan Benaro (male age 16, member of Anak ng Bayan), and Ramong "Jong-jong" Regase, Jr. (male age 17, motorcycle driver), were stopped while on the way home from a birthday party in Davao City. The four were on board a skylab motorcycle when two vehicles, reportedly a red and white Tamarraw FX, blocked them somewhere in Maco, a few kilometres away from the 1101st military outpost. According to witnesses, two of the male victims tried to get away but were shot in the legs by their abductors before being dragged into the vehicle with the others. The perpetrators are suspected to be Willy Javier and other agents of the Military Intelligence Group. Prior to the incident, another skylab driver reports having stopped in his vehicle by Willy Javier at the Maco crossing terminal, during a search for an alleged rebel named Toto Rama.   An hour after the abduction, Gloria Reynoso, Marjorie's mother, tried to contact her daughter via her mobile phone. A recording responded initially, then later she fell upon a man who laughed at her and hung up, and then rang her back, before turning the phone off. The four victims remained missing until the morning of September 23rd, 2003, when a banana plantation worker named "Tata," a security guard Juanilo Labaco, and Ernesto Aralan found their bodies in a makeshift shallow grave at the Selecta Farms, Area 307, Purok 1, Crossing Blanco, Brgy, Osmena, Compostella, Compstella Valley Province. Their bodies were piled up on top of each other, with Marjorie at the top.  The victims’ bodies revealed signs of torture. Marjorie's mouth was covered with masking tape and her tongue was sticking out, indicating that she may have been strangled. There were also marks around her neck. Her eyes were wide open and she had sustained two gunshot wounds on the left side of her head. Her chest and lower armpit also revealed several bruises. The three male victims were stripped down to their underwear. They had bruises on different parts of their bodies and a number of what witnesses believed to be stab wounds.   Separately, 45-year-old Mr. Mario "Mayong" Auxillo, a Regional Officer of Bayan Muna (People First), was abducted on September 26th, 2003. He was on the way home from a meeting of the Bayan Muna chapter in Sitio Riverside, Inawayan, Cebu, when a dark green L-300 van without license plates blocked his path on the sidewalk. Armed persons in plain clothers, thought to be agents of the Regional Intelligence and Investigation Division of the Philippine National Police, Region 7 Office, descended upon Mayong and dragged him into the van.   He was reportedly then taken to a safe house near the Mactan Airbase in Lapu-Lapu City, where he underwent tactical interrogation about the activities of the New People's Army and Bayan Muna until the next day. The agents also asked him about specific individuals from the region that are involved in the New People's Army. During the interrogation, Mayong's captors punched him in the stomach and struck him on his head if he failed to answer their questions. During this time, Mayong was neither informed of his basic rights nor the reason for his arrest. He was released the following day.   The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned by the torture and Extra-judicial execution of Lito Doydoy, Marjorie Reynoso, Jonathan Benaro and Ramong "Jong-jong" Regase, Jr., notably as two of them are children, and the abduction and ill-treatment of Mr. Auxillo. OMCT calls on the authorities to immediately order a thorough and impartial investigation into the alleged use of torture and the circumstances of the victims' death, as well as Mr. Auxillo’s abduction and the violation of his personal integrity, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial, apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law. OMCT also calls upon the authorities to guarantee that adequate reparation is provided to Mr. Auxillo and the families of the deceased.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Philippines urging them to:  i.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the alleged use of torture and the circumstances of the victims' death, as well as Mr. Auxillo’s abduction and the violation of his personal integrity, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; ii.	guarantee that adequate reparation is provided to the victims of these abuses and their families; iii.	put an immediate end to all forms of torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment in accordance with national and international legislation as well as article 2 of the Convention Against Torture and particularly with article 37 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President, Republic of the Philippines, New Executive Building, Malacañang, Palace Compound, J.P. Laurel St., San Miguel, Manila, Philippines, Fax no.: +632 929 3968, Email: opnet@ops.gov.ph or kgma@yahoogroups.com ·	Angelo T. Reyes, Secretary, Department of National Defense, Camp General Aguinaldo, Quezon City, Fax: +632911-6213, Email: osnd@philoneline.com ·	Hon. Simeon Datumanong, Secretary, Department of Justice, DOJ Bldg., Padre Faura, 1004, Manila, Fax: +632521-1614 Email: sechbp@info.com.ph ·	Hon. Purificacion Valera Quisumbing, Chairperson, Commission on Human Rights, SAAC bldg., UP complex, Commonwealth Avenue, Diliman, Quezon City, Philippines, Fax: +632 929-0102, Email: apnr@chr.gov.ph ·	Hon. Loretta Ann Rosales, House of Representatives, Chairman Comm. On Civil/Political Rights, Email: conglapr@nsclub.net ·	Hon. Francisco Pangilinan, Office of the Senate, Fax no. +632 5526601, Email: kiko@fplaw.com.ph ·	Ambassadeur, Ramel, Samuel T., Av. Blanc 47, CH-1202, Genève, Suisse, e-mail: philippine.mission@ties.itu.int, fax: +4122 716 19 33  Please also write to the embassies of Philippines in your respective country.  Geneva, October 3rd, 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 