Guatemala:  Guatemala: disappearance of Mr Carlos Antonio Marroquín Arriaza
October 18, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Guatemala / 2001 / OctoberGuatemala: Guatemala: disappearance of Mr Carlos Antonio Marroquín ArriazaCase GTM 181001  The International Secretariat of the OMCT requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Guatemala :  Brief description of the situation:  The International Secretariat of the OMCT has received information concerning the presumed disappearance of Mr Carlos Antonio Marroquín Arriaza in Guatemala City.  Accordign to the information received from the Federación Latinoamericana de Asociaciones de Familiares de Detenidos Desaparecidos (FEDEFAM) and Grupo de Apoyo Mutuo (G.A.M), Mr Carlos Antonio Marroquín Arriaza, 32, married and father of 2 children aged 11 and 9, left his house on 25 September 2001 at about 9.00am.  He was going to meet two people whose names are so far not known.  Mr Marroquín Arriaza was reportedly arbitrarily arrested by six unknown persons after meeting the two above-mentioned persons, and all three were taken by car to an unknown location.  According to the reports, the car in which they had been driven away later was later discovered in the area of San Lucas Sacatepuquez, but there has been no sign of the three missing persons and there are therefore reasons to fear for their physical and psychological integrity.    The reports add that on 27 November 2001, two days after the disappearance, somebody made a call from Mr. Marroquín Arriaza’s cell phone to a number corresponding to the Estado Mayor de la Defensa Nacional, which arouses reasons to fear that members of the military may be involved his illegal capture and forced disappearance.  According to the reports, Mr Marroquín Arriaza is not known to have participated in any social or political organisation and the reasons for his disappearance are unknown.  The International Secretariat of the OMCT shares the grave concern voiced by Grupo de Apoyo Mutuo and FEDEFAM for the physical and psychological integrity of Mr Carlos Antonio Marroquín Arriaza.  Requested Action:  Please write to the Guatemalan Authorities urging them to:  i. take all measures necessary to locate the above-mentioned persons and to guarantee their physical and psychological integrity; ii. order a thorough and impartial investigation into the above.mentioned events in order to identify those reponsible, bring them to justice and apply the civil, penal or adminstrative sanctions stipulted by law; iii. fully execute the recommendations made by international and regional human rights organisations, including those of the High Commission for Human Rights, the United Nations Human Rights Commission, the Inter.American Human Rights Commission as well as national and governmental human rights organisations; iv. guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental liberties in all the country in accordance with national law and international human rights norms.  Addresses  Lic. Alfonso Portillo, Presidente de la República - E-mail: mensajes@presidenteportillo.gob.gt  Dr. Sergio F. Morales Alvarado, Procurador de los Derechos Humanos – Fax: 502.238-1734. E-mail: opdhg@internet.net.gt  Lic. Alfonso Portillo, Presidente de la República - E-mail: mensajes@presidenteportillo.gob.gt  Dr. Sergio F. Morales Alvarado, Procurador de los Derechos Humanos – Fax: 502.238-1734. E-mail: opdhg@internet.net.gt  Lic. Carlos D. De León Argueta, Fiscal General y Jefe del Ministerio Público – Fax: 502.221-2718. E-mail: minpub@mp.lex.gob.gt  Lic. Víctor H. Godoy, Ministro de Trabajo – Fax: 230-1363. E-mail: ministro@mintrabajo.gob.gt  Lic. Luis A. Pañagua G., Director de la Policía Nacional Civil – Fax: 502.251-9382  Please also write to the embassies of Guatemala in your respective country.  Geneva, 18 October, 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 