Bahrain:  Nabeel Rajab sentenced to two years in appeal: a sad day for the defence of human rights
December 11, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2012 / DecemberBahrain: Nabeel Rajab sentenced to two years in appeal: a sad day for the defence of human rights


PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

 
BAHRAIN: Nabeel Rajab
sentenced to two
years in appeal: a sad day for the defence of human rights
 
Paris-Geneva, December 11, 2012. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), deplores the two years' imprisonment sentence issued today in appeal against Mr.
Nabeel Rajab. His lawyers immediately announced their intention to lodge an appeal
before the Cassation Court.
 
Mr. Nabeel Rajab is the
Deputy Secretary General of FIDH, the President of the Bahrain Centre for Human
Rights (BCHR) and the Director of the Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR). He
was sentenced in appeal to two years of prison for participating in peaceful
gatherings and calling others to join. This conviction blatantly violates the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which provides that
participation in peaceful activities to protest against violations of human
rights, including through peaceful assemblies, are protected under
international law. This decision took place one day after International Human
Rights Day and sends a negative signal to the international community, which
has been calling for reforms and an end to the repression of critical voices in
Bahrain.
 
On August 16, 2012, the Lower
Criminal Court had sentenced Mr. Rajab in first instance to three years in
prison for three cases related to his participation in peaceful gatherings in
favour of fundamental freedoms and democracy. 
 
“Today's shameful ruling in
appeal shows once again the determination of the Bahraini authorities to keep
on silencing critical voices in the country. With this decision in appeal, our
Deputy Secretary General will remain detained arbitrarily simply because he
dared conducting human rights activities in the country”, FIDH President
Souhayr Belhassen said today. “We will continue to demand his immediate and
unconditional release”, Amina Bouayach, FIDH Vice President added. Ms.
Bouayach was mandated by the Observatory to attend today's verdict in the
framework of an international trial observation mission.
 
“We deplore Nabeel
Rajab’s sentencing, which is one more evidence of the continued criminalisation
of human rights defenders’ activities in Bahrain”, said OMCT Secretary
General Gerald Staberock. “We call upon
the Bahraini authorities to guarantee in all circumstances his physical and psychological integrity, as well as to ensure that human rights defenders
can operate without fear of harassment in the country”, he added.
 
The Observatory observed most of the hearings in the
trial in appeal against Mr. Nabeel Rajab, and will publish a trial observation
mission report soon.
 
For more information, please contact:
·      
FIDH: Arthur Manet/Audrey Couprie: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
·      
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41 (0) 22 809 49 39 