Congo, Democratic Republic:  'D.R. CongoDemocratic Republic of Congo: kidnapping and torture of Mr. Kalala Mwitangila
August 16, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Congo, Democratic Republic / 2001 / AugustCongo, Democratic Republic: 'D.R. CongoDemocratic Republic of Congo: kidnapping and torture of Mr. Kalala MwitangilaCase COD 180401.1 Follow-up Case COD 180401.1  Release  Geneva, October 1, 2001  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information concerning the following situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo.  New Information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed during September by the African Association of Defense of Human Rights (ASADHO), a member of the OMCT network, of the release of  two detainees in Democratic Republic of Congo.  According to the information received, the Congolese authorities released Pastor Carlos Rodrigues and aide Mrs. Christine, several weeks after their arrest, which took place on April 6, 2001.   Remarks  OMCT wishes to thank all those institutions, organisations and individuals who intervened on the detainees’ behalf.  Brief Reminder of the Situation  According to the information received, Pastor Rodrigues of the Pentecostal Church of New Jerusalem was arbitrarily arrested by a group of plain-clothes armed men at around 14.30 on April 6, 2001, and was transported in a Mercedes 500 to the State Security Committee's detention facilities in Ngaliema. He was detained incommunicado and without food at these premises until April 10, after which time he was placed under house arrest. Similarly, Mrs. Christine was arbitrarily arrested in her apartment, located in the commune of Gombe, by members of the armed forces, at around 8.00 in the morning of April 10th, 2001. She was also held incommunicado and without food at the State Security Committee's premises until she was released on April 11th, 2001. She is also now under house arrest. The motives behind the arrest and subsequent house arrest remain unclear.  Geneva, October 1, 2001 