Azerbaijan:  Azerbaijan - Ill-treatment and harassment of members of youth organisation, 'Yeni Fikir'
August 25, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2005 / AugustAzerbaijan: Azerbaijan - Ill-treatment and harassment of members of youth organisation, 'Yeni Fikir'Case AZE 250805 Ill-treatment and harassment  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Azerbaijan.  Brief Description of the SituationThe International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Human Rights Centre of Azerbaijan, a member of the OMCT network, of the arrest of Mr. Ruslan Bashirli, head of the youth organisation Yeni Fikir (“New Idea”).   According to the information, Mr. Ruslan Bashirli was arrested on August 3, 2005, on charges of plotting to overthrow the Azerbaijani leadership at the instigation of Armenian intelligence agents, with whom he allegedly met in Tbilisi on July 28 and 29, 2005. A criminal case under clause 278th of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Azerbaijan (actions directed to seizing or keeping the power by force) was brought against him by the Prosecutor’s Office of the Republic of Azerbaijan. If found guilty, he could face life imprisonment. According to the information received, Mr. Ruslan Bashirli was not able to meet with his lawyer, Mr. ‘El’chin Gambarov, for two days after his arrest. Mr. Ruslan Bashirli is reportedly detained in an isolation cell of the Bayil remand prison, located in Baku city.  Furthermore, Mr. Ruslan Bashirli’s family has been subjected to harassment. Mr. Ruslan Bashirli’s father, Mr. Djalil Bashirli, was forced to leave his position as a schoolteacher. Moreover, his house, located in Zardob, was attacked by a mob who threw stones at his house. Mr. Ruslan Bashirli’s uncle, Mr. Fuzuli Qasimov, senior tax inspector in the region of Goychay, was dismissed on August 8, 2005.   The International Secretariat of OMCT was also informed that Mr. Sarvan Sarhanov, a member of the youth organisation Yeni Fikir (“New Idea”), was called in for questioning on August 11, 2005. According to the information received, Mr. Sarvan Sarhanov was interrogated by three investigators – Mr. Ali Quliyev, Mr. Azer Amirov and Mr. Rahimov –, at the Department for Serious Criminal Cases of the Prosecutor office. He was beaten on the face and the back by investigating officers after refusing to give false testimony charging Mr. Ali Kerimli, chairman of the opposition party PNFA, and Mr. Qanimat Zahidov, of Azadliq newspaper. A fourth investigator reportedly threatened him to squash his fingers by means of pliers and to tear out one of his ears. Mr. Sarvan Sarhanov was eventually released without any charge on August 11, 2005. The Prosecutor Office confirmed Mr. Sarvan Sarhanov had been interviewed by investigators at the Prosecutor Office. However, it denied that Mr. Sarvan Sarhanov was subjected to any threats or ill-treatment.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Ruslan Bashirli and his family, as well as that of Mr. Sarvan Sarhanov.  OMCT is also concerned by the general climate of harassment against members of the youth organisation Yeni Fikir. For example, an activist of Yeni Fikir, Mr.Namiq Feyziyev, who studies at the Azerbaijan Pedagogical University was expelled from the university by order of the University's Rector, Mr. Bahlul Agayev, on June 22, 2005, for having missed lessons. Many youth associations protested, as Mr. Namiq Feyziyev had reportedly attended all lectures. Further to the intervention of the Ombudsman, Mr. Feyziyev returned to the University on July 6, 2005.  Action requested:Please write to the authorities in Azerbaijan urging them to:  i.	Take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Ruslan Bashirli and his family as well as of Mr. Sarvan Sarhanov; ii.	Order the immediate release of Mr. Ruslan Bashirli in the absence of valid legal charges, and if such charges exist, to ensure that he is given a prompt and fair trial, in which his procedural rights are guaranteed at all times; iii.	Order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iv.	Guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with international human rights standards.  Addresses:Mr. Ilham Aliyev, President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Office of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, 19 Istiqlaliyyat St., Baku AZ1066, Azerbaijan, Fax: +994 12 492 06 25, +994 412 92 28 68, E-mail: office@apparat.gov.az, president@gov.az, root@lider.baku.az  Prosecutor’s Office, 7 Nigar Rafibeyli St., Baku, Azerbaijan, Fax: +994 12 492 06 82, +994 12 492 26 63, E-mail: prosec@azeri.com  Lt.-Gen. Ramil Usubov, Minister of Internal Affairs of the Azerbaijani Republic, Fax: + 994 12 492 45 90  Mr. Fikret Mamedov, Minister of Justice in Azerbaijan, Prospekt Stroitelej, 1 Baku Azerbaijan, e-mail: contact@justice.gov.az, Tel (99412) 430 01 16, Fax (99412) 430 09 81  H.E. Ambassador, Mr. Elchin Amirbayov, Rue de Lausanne 67, CH-1202, Genève, Suisse, e-mail : az.mission.unog@iprolink.ch, fax: +4122 901 18 44  Please also write to the embassy of Azerbaijan in your respective country.  Geneva, 25th August 2005.  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 