Ukraine:  Press Release: Suspect arrested in the killing of Katerina Gandzyuk: Fighting impunity in attacks against civil society must be a priority
November 16, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Ukraine / 2018 / NovemberUkraine: Press Release: Suspect arrested in the killing of Katerina Gandzyuk: Fighting impunity in attacks against civil society must be a priorityPRESS
RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

 
Paris-Geneva, November 16, 2018 - Ukraine’s authorities have arrested
an individual for alleged involvement in the attack against Ms. Katerina Gandzyuk. The brutal acid attack she suffered that ultimately
led to her death constitutes yet another of the litany of attacks against human
rights defenders, including women, in the country. The Observatory (FIDH-OMCT)
calls upon Ukrainian authorities to effectively investigate this crime as well
as all the other attacks on activists and human rights defenders, and to take
all necessary measures to guarantee the safety of all civil society
representatives in Ukraine. 

The attacks on human rights defenders and activists in Ukraine have become more
frequent in recent months. On November 4, 2018, Ms. Katerina Gandzyuk succumbed to the
injuries she had suffered from an earlier attack. Ms. Gandzyuk was a member of
the Kherson city council (Southern Ukraine)
and a prominent campaigner against police corruption and Russia-backed
separatism. On July 31, assailants poured almost a litre of sulfuric acid on
her, which resulted in chemical burns to over 35% of her skin. On November 12, an assistant of a ruling-party deputy
of the Ukrainian Parliament, Igor Pavlovsky, was
arrested as a suspect in this case. The authorities believe him to be an
intermediary between the perpetrators and those who had ordered the murder. 
 
“The tragic death
of Katya Gandzyuk should become the final call for the authorities to take
notice of the problem of persecution of activists in regions where the security
services have merged with the corrupt local elites. We demand the effective
investigation of all cases of attacks and a real fight against impunity” stated Oleksandra Matveychuk, Head of the Center for Civil Liberties,
FIDH member organisation.
 
Since
the beginning of 2017, human rights organisations have documented
as many as 55 unsolved attacks against activists. According
to the United Nations, from May 16 to August 15, 2018, 30 attacks on
journalists, defenders and activists, including physical violence, humiliation
and intimidation, have been committed in Ukraine. Against this background, the
statement of Prosecutor General of Ukraine Yury Lutsenko, made during a
September-27 press conference after a session of the Parliament’s Committee on
national security, that some of the activists “show an atmosphere of utmost hatred for the authorities” and therefore
bear the blame for the attacks, is extremely irresponsible.
 
Among
the most notorious examples of recent attacks against human
rights defenders, on January 1, 2018, the body of
human rights defender Ms. Irina Nozdrovskaya, who was investigating the death of her sister, was found in the woods
near Kyiv. On June 5, environmental activist Mr. Mykola Bychko was found
dead in a village in Kharkiv region. Mr. Bychko was documenting the pollution
of a local river, allegedly caused by a nearby plant. Besides, other activists
such as Mr. Vitaly Oleshko, Donbas
veteran and a political activist, who
opposed the local authorities, was
shot in Berdyansk on July 31. On August 2, a truck rammed a car with the two
Odessa anti-corruption activists, investigative journalist Grigory Kozma and
head of the Odesa branch of the People’s Movement of Ukraine party Mykhailo
Kuzakon. On September 22, also in Odessa, an unknown person shot activist Mr.
Oleg Mikhailik, who had campaigned with the People’s
Power movement (“Syla Lyudei”), a political party, against illegal construction in Odessa. This list continues to grow
every day. Those who ordered the crimes have not been identified in any of
these cases. In some, even the names of the perpetrators remain unknown. 
 
“We are extremely
concerned about the brutality of Katerina Gandzyuk’s murder. The murder of the
defender is a marker of an unhealthy, aggressive climate in which human rights
defenders of Ukraine are forced to work and resist”, highlighted Ilya Nuzov, FIDH Eastern Europe and
Central Asia Desk Director. “We join
the requests of the international community and the civil society in Ukraine to
conduct an impartial, effective, prompt and transparent investigation. Attacks
on human rights defenders should not go unpunished and all those responsible
shall be brought to justice” concluded Gerald
Staberock, OMCT Secretary General.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the
Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or
remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH
are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights
Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
For further information, please contact:
·      
FIDH: Audrey Couprie:
+33 1 43 55 25 18 / acouprie@fidh.org
·      
OMCT: Miguel Martín /
Delphine Reculeau: Tel: +41 22 809 49 39 