India:  Cancellation of the license of Sabrang Trust under the FCRA
July  6, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / India / 2016 / JulyIndia: Cancellation of the license of Sabrang Trust under the FCRA
IND 003 / 0716 / OBS 054
Obstacles to freedom of association / 
Harassment
India
July 6, 2016

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in India.
 
Brief description of the situation:

 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the cancellation of the license of Sabrang Trust under the Foreign
Contributions (Regulations) Act of 2010 by the Ministry of Home Affairs of
India. Sabrang Trust, a non-governmental organisation headed
by Ms. Teesta Setalvad, works to
promote conflict resolution and support peace building. In particular, Ms.
Setalvad and her organisation have been at the forefront of protests and legal
interventions on behalf of victims and their families against crimes committed
against Muslims during the Gujarat riots of 2002 and have been sharply critical
of the then Gujarat State government led by Mr. Narendra Modi, now Prime
Minister of India.
 
According to the information received, on June 16, 2016, the Ministry of
Home Affairs announced on its website that the licence of Sabrang Trust had
been cancelled under the Foreign Contributions (Regulations) Act (FCRA) with “immediate effect”[1]. Accordingly, Sabrang Trust can no longer receive foreign funding.
Sabrang Trust indicated that it would challenge the order.
 
The licence of Sabrang Trust had already been suspended on September 9,
2015 for a period of 180 days (see background information).
 
The Observatory expresses its deepest
concern about the obstacles to freedom of association and access to funding
faced by Sabrang Trust, which seem to be merely aimed at
sanctioning the organisation's human rights activities, in particular its work for justice and truth with regard to the
2002 Gujarat riots. Accordingly, the Observatory calls upon the Indian
authorities to immediately and unconditionally repeal the cancellation of Sabrang Trust’s FCRA registration, in order to allow this prominent organisation to
carry out its legitimate human rights work. 
 
The Observatory further recalls that on May 31, 2016, the FCRA licence of the NGO Lawyers
Collective was suspended by the Ministry of Home Affairs[2].
 
In a statement released on June
16, 2016, United Nations (UN) Special Rapporteurs on the situation of human
rights defenders, Mr. Michel Forst, on freedom of opinion and expression, Mr.
David Kaye, and on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of
association, Mr. Maina Kiai, called upon the Government of India to repeal the
Foreign Contributions (Regulation) Act and said that they “are alarmed that
FCRA provisions are being used more and more to silence organisations
advocating civil, political, economic, social, environmental and cultural
priorities, which may differ from those backed by the Government”. According to the UN experts’ statement, FCRA is being “increasingly used
to obstruct civil society’s access to foreign funding, and fails to comply with
international human rights norms and standards”. They encouraged the
authorities of India “to ensure a safe and enabling environment for human
rights defenders and civil society, which play a critical role in holding the
Government to account and buttressing Indian democracy”.
 
In April 2016, the UN Special Rapporteur
on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association published a legal analysis of the FCRA and stated that the statute is “not in
conformity with international law, principles and standards”. The Special
Rapporteur further mentioned in the report that “[the FCRA] appears to give the
government broad discretionary powers that could be applied in an arbitrary and
capricious manner”. The Government of India has yet to respond to the Special
Rapporteur regarding his analysis.  
 
Background information:
 
Judicial proceedings have been ongoing
against Ms. Teesta Setalvad and her spouse since 2013, based on spurious
charges of alleged embezzlement of funds intended for the construction of a
memorial to the victims of the 2002 Gujarat riots. Ms. Teesta Setalvad had to
seek anticipatory bail from the Supreme Court in relation to this case. An
investigation that began in January 2014 has resulted in continuous harassment
and systematic probes into the accounts of Sabrang Trust and groundless accusations of non-cooperation. On July
14, 2015, Ms. Teesta Setalvad's house and office were raided by officers of the
Central Bureau of Investigation and on June 29, 2015, a travel ban was imposed
on her[3]. Her application for anticipatory bail is
still pending before the Supreme Court of India. The next hearing in the case is scheduled for July 11, 2016. 
 
On February 12, 2015, the Gujarat High Court denied anticipatory bail to
Ms. Teesta Setalvad and her husband, Mr. Javeed Anand. 40 minutes later,
Gujarat police arrived at their residence in Mumbai. However, on the same day
the Supreme Court issued a stay on the High Court order, which prevented the
couple from being arrested.
 
On March 10, 2015, the Government of Gujarat’s Home department wrote to
the Ministry of Home Affairs, ordering the Ministry of Home Affairs to carry
out an inspection of Sabrang Trust upon allegation of FCRA violations.
 
From April 9 to 11, 2015, a
four-member FCRA Inspection Team headed by Shri Mahendra Kumar, Deputy
Secretary (MHA/GOI), inspected the accounts and related records of Sabrang
Trust in Mumbai. All original documents and photocopies as required by the
Inspection Team were submitted, along with printouts of books of accounts of
Sabrang Trust’s FCRA account. Receipts for the same were duly acknowledged by
the Inspection Team.
 
Sabrang Trust subsequently
received an official post-inspection communication from the FCRA department.
The notice, signed by Under Secretary Shri Anand Joshi, who was not part of the
Inspection Team, and dated June 4, 2015, made several ”observations” concerning
alleged violations of the FCRA, 2010 and the FCR Rules, 2011.
 
Through a detailed letter
dated June 25, 2015, Sabrang Trust responded to each allegation,
point-by-point, highlighting how, contrary to what was claimed in the “observations”,
the Trust had not violated any provision of the FCR Act and Rules.
 
Sabrang Trust received an
'Order' dated September 9, 2015, signed by Deputy Secretary Shri Mahendra Kumar
(who had headed the Inspection Team in April 2015), suspending the FCRA
registration of Sabrang Trust for a period of 180 days.
 
In response, through a
detailed letter dated October 5, 2015, addressed to the Deputy Secretary,
Sabrang Trust challenged again the 'Order', denying once again having committed
any FCRA violation. The Trust requested that it be given an opportunity for its
members to present the case in person before the FCRA authorities.
 
Subsequently, Sabrang Trust
received a letter dated March 30, 2016 signed by Shri D.P. Tripathy, Director
of FCRA Monitoring Unit, asking Mr. Javeed Anand, Sabrang Trust's Chief
Functionary, to appear before him on April 16, 2016 to present Sabrang Trust's
case. Accordingly, Mr. Javeed Anand and a lawyer appeared before the Director
of FCRA Monitoring Unit to further support Sabrang Trust's contention that it
had not violated any provision of the FCR Act and Rules. The meeting lasted
less than 10 minutes.
 
Actions requested:

 
Please write to the authorities in India,
urging them to:
 
i. Repeal immediately and
unconditionally the cancellation of Sabrang Trust’s FCRA registration, as this
cancellation only seems aimed at sanctioning Sabrang Trust’s legitimate human
rights activities;
 
ii. Put an end to all acts of
harassment - including at the judicial level - against Sabrang Trust, Ms.
Teesta Setalvad and Mr. Javeed Anand, as well as against all human rights defenders and
organisations in India so that they are able to carry out their work without
hindrances;
 
iii. Conform with the provisions of the UN
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the
United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially its Articles 1 and 12.2; and
 
iv. More generally, ensure in all
circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with
international and regional human rights instruments ratified by India.

Addresses: 

Mr. Shri Nanredra Damodardas Modi, Prime
Minister of India, Fax: + 91 11 2301 6857. E-mail: pmosb@pmo.nic.in / manmo@sansad.inMr. Raj Nath Singh, Union Minister of Home
Affairs of India, Fax: +91 11 2309 2979. Email: dirfcra-mha@gov.inJustice T.S. Thakur,, Chief Justice of India, Supreme
Court, of India, Fax: +91 11 233 83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.inJustice Shri H.L. Dattu, Chairperson of the National Human Rights
Commission of India, Fax +91 11 2465 1329. Email: covdnhrc@nic.in; ionhrc@nic.inMr. Srinivasa
Kammath, Focal Point on
Human Rights Defenders, National Human Rights Commission, of India, Email: hrd-nhrc@nic.inH.E. Mr. Ajit Kumar, Ambassador,
Permanent Mission of India to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax:
+41 22 906 86 96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.intEmbassy of India in Brussels, Belgium,
Fax: +32 2 6489638 / +32 2 6451869

Please also write to the diplomatic
mission or embassy of India in your respective country.




[1]
The order cancelling the FCRA registration of Sabrang
Trust says more than 50% of the foreign contributions obtained under the FCRA
has been spent on administrative expenses without prior permission of the
Central Government. In response to this alleged violation, Sabrang Trust had submitted a detailed
worksheet along with copies of its annual returns to show that administrative
expenses during the financial year 2010-2011 were 30% of the total, and during
the financial year 2011-12 were 31.5% of the total. Apart from the blanket
claim that its administrative expenses during these two years were 64.23% and
55.14% respectively, the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) did not
explain how they had arrived at these figures. The MHA’s response to the
detailed explanation submitted by Sabrang Trust was simply “found not
satisfactory”.


[2]
See Observatory Urgent Appeal IND 002 / 0616 / OBS 046, June 8, 2016.


[3]
See Women Human
Rights Defenders International Coalition (WHRDIC) joint statement, August 3,
2015. 