Kyrgyzstan:  Kyrgyzstan : new acts of harassment against KCHR
September  2, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2003 / SeptemberKyrgyzstan: Kyrgyzstan : new acts of harassment against KCHRURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY  KGZ 002/0803/OBS 044 Harassment / Fear for safety Kyrgyzstan September 2nd, 2003   The Observatory for the protection of human rights defenders, a joint  programme of FIDH and OMCT, requests your urgent intervention in the  following situation in Kyrgyzstan :  Description of the situation:  The Observatory has been informed by the Kyrgyz Committee for Human  Rights (KCHR), a member organisation of the FIDH and the OMCT, of new  acts of harassment against the KCHR and its Chairman, Mr. Ramazan  Dyryldaev.  According to the information received, on August 14th, 2003, a  courier brought a letter dated August 13th, to KCHR office from the  Ministry of Justice, signed by the deputy Minister Alymbaev N., in  which the Ministry ordered KCHR to apply for a new registration  within ten days in accordance with the new version of the  Constitution that was adopted on February 2nd, 2003, and the Law "On  non-commercial organizations" adopted on October 15th, 1999.  According to the Ministry of Justice, this registration is required  due to the inconsistency of some provisions of KCHR's Charter with  the Constitution and the Law on NCOs (Non-Commercial Organizations).  The Observatory is concerned by this request, since in August 1999,  Mr. E. Mamyrov, Deputy Justice Minister, had notified members of the  KCHR that the organization had been re-registered and had once again  legal status (this occurred after a ten-month period, during which  KCHR had been de-registered by the same Ministry).  Moreover, on August 25th, during a press-conference in AkiPress,  former KCHR members, Mr. Tynaliev, Mr. Mombekov, Mr. Jakishev and  others, declared that they dismissed Mr. Dyryldaev from the position  of chair of KCHR and selected Mr. Tynaliev as the new chairman.  The Observatory notes that Mr. Dyryldaev was legally re-elected as  KCHR Chairman by KCHR members on 11 May 2003. Moreover, it should be  noted that acting members of KCHR and its Board of Directors did not  participate in this conference and that according to KCHR Charter,  only a majority of the Board of Directors or Chair have the right to  call meetings. Among the participants there were no acting members of  the Board of Directors : only former members, who are supported by  the government, participated in this conference. Finally, it should  be noted that a room in a cinema was provided to them for the  conference while KCHR never has an opportunity to gain access to a  room for holding conferences or assemblies. Therefore this conference  is considered as being illegal by KCHR.  Moreover, it is reported that, after the press conference, Mr.  Tynaliev tried to beat Mr. Giyaz Tokombaev, a son of Mr. Dyryldaev  and Mr. Doolot Nusupov, a collaborator of KCHR. When those present  started to shout, he left Mr. Tokombaev. Later, Mr. Tynaliev called  Mr. Tokombaev several times on a phone and assaulted him including  with death threats. He announced that he will confiscate, with the  support of the government, all the property of Mr. Dyryldaev. Mr.  Tynaliev also declared that he is supported by the General Attorney,  the administration of the President and special services.  According to the information received, Mr. Tynaliev, voluntarily left  KCHR more than one year ago and Mr. Mombekov and Mr. Jakishev were  dismissed by KCHR for activities beyond KCHR mandate.   Finally, on August 1st, Mr. Bulatov, a former coordinator of KCHR in  Naryn oblast, who also had been dismissed by the KCHR for activities  beyond of its mandate, was restored by Pervomaiskii Court in February  2003, to work in KCHR without the participation of the representative  from KCHR, who would have provided proof of circumstances of  dismissal.  These acts against the KCHR are part of a constant strategy of  harassment against human rights defenders in the course of their  duties. The Observatory fears that these manoeuvres, which aims are  visibly to disturb and to discredit the activities of the KCHR, may  be instrumentalized by the authorities to hinder the work of the  KCHR, as it already occurred in the past on several occasions.   The observatory recalls that "every person has the right,  individually or collectively, to promote the protection and  fulfilment of human rights and fundamental liberties at the national  and international level"(article 1) and "everyone has the right,  individually or in association with others, to solicit receive and  utilize resources for the express purpose of promoting and protecting  human rights and fundamental freedoms through peaceful means"(article  13).  Action requested:  Please write to the Kyrgyz authorities urging them to :  i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological  integrity of Mr. Ramazan Dyryldaev and Mr. Giyaz Tokombaev;  ii. Put an end to the harassment directed at the Kyrgyz Committee for  Human Rights, Mr. Ramazan Dyryldaev and all human rights defenders in  Kyrgyzstan, and ensure that they be allowed to carry out their work  without hindrance;  iii. Ensure the implementation of the provisions on the Declaration  on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN general Assembly on  December 9th1998, in particular  article 1 which states that "every person has the right, individually  or collectively, to promote the protection and fulfilment of human  rights and fundamental liberties at the  national and international level", as well as its article 12.1 which  stipulates that "everyone has the right, individually or in  association with others, to participate in peaceful  activities against violations of human rights and fundamental  freedoms";  iv. Guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in  accordance with the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other  international instruments  ratified by the Kyrgyz Republic.    Addresses:  Mr Askar Akayev, President of the Kyrgyz Republic, Kyrgyzskaya  Respublika, 720003 g. Bishkek, Prospekt Chuy, 205, Fax: 996 312 218  627, Email:  ghpress2@rhl.bishkek.su  Mr. Nikolai Tanaev, Prime Minister, Fax: 996 312 218 627  Mr. Kurmanbek Osmonov, Minister of Justice, Fax: 996 312 663 044    Paris - Geneva, September 2nd, 2003  Kindly inform the Observatory of any action undertaken quoting the  code number of this appeal in your reply.  The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the  protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete  support in their time of need.  The Observatory was the winner of the 1998 Human Rights Prize of the  French Republic.   To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: Tel and fax: FIDH : +33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11 / 43 55 18 80 Tel and fax  OMCT : (+ 41 22) 809 49 39 / 809 49 29 E-mail : observatoire@iprolink.ch 