Venezuela:  Allegations of torture against a 16-year-old girl and her father in order to obtain statements in Caracas
February  7, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / Venezuela / 2011 / FebruaryVenezuela: Allegations of torture against a 16-year-old girl and her father in order to obtain statements in Caracas​Case VEN 040211.CC/ VEN 040211_ENG[1]CHILD CONCERN/ URGENT CAMPAIGNS
Allegations of torture and ill-treatment/ Threats and
acts of intimidation/ 
Serious fear for safety and personal integrity 
 
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention
in the following situation in Venezuela.
Brief description of the situation
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been
informed by Red de Apoyo por la Justicia y la Paz (REDAPOYO) a
member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about allegations of torture and
ill-treatment inflicted on the teenage girl Francis Daniela Núñez Martínez,
16 years old, and her father Mr. Daniel Antonio Núñez, aiming at
extracting information, and about serious fear for the safety and, physical and psychological integrity of
the aforementioned girl, her father and all other members of her family. The
events happened in the community of Brisas de Petare, in the city of Caracas.
According to the information received, on 29
 January 2011, a
birthday party for Francis Daniela Núnez Martínez was being held in Mr. Daniel Antonio
Núñez’s house. According the
same information, a group of approximate 80 persons gathered around the house,
although they had not been invited to the party and were unknown to the family.
Around 3.30 a.m.
gunshots were heard outside the house. It was known afterwards that a young
girl, whose name remains unknown, and who had not been invited to the party and
was unknown to anyone of Francis Daniela’s family, was shot. The girl died
afterwards in the Domingo Luciani Hospital.
The following day, on 30 January 2010, around 11.30 a.m., a group of six to eight uniformed members
of the investigative police (Cuerpo de Investigaciones Científicas, Penales y
Criminalísticas (CICPC)) arrived at
Mr. Daniel
Antonio Núñez’s house and started to make questions regarding the previous
night’s events. They noted down Mr.
Daniel
Antonio Núñez’s, his daughter Francis
Daniela Núnez Martínez’s and Jesus Alberto Vivas’, a cousin of hers, personal data and a summoning was handed over to them to
appear the very same day to testify at the CICPC quarters.
Mr. Daniel Antonio Núñez, Francis Daniela Núnez Martínez and Mr. Jesus Alberto
Vivas went to CICPC quarters around 12 o’clock, where they were separated and put in
separate rooms. Mr. Daniel Antonio Núñez remained seated for around two hours until he was
ordered to clear his trouser pockets. Mr. Núñez’s mobile phone was also seized.
Afterwards two other members of the investigative police arrived asking him what he had seen and who had
shot at the young girl. Mr. Núñez answered that he didn’t know, because he
wasn’t present at the place where the events occurred. He was subsequently
grossly insulted and taken to yet another office.
After being ordered to
take off his shoelaces and his belt, members of the investigative police, started again to ask Mr.
Núñez who had shot the girl, insisting that he did know who the perpetrator
was. Mr. Núñez repeated that he didn’t know, following which he was beaten on
the neck and several times in the face. They went on threatening him with
raping his daughter, putting afterwards a black bag over his head, having roped
his hands before, so as to asphyxiate him. Finally, Mr. Núñez signed and put
his digital prints on a statement after having read it.
In the meantime, in
another room, Francis Daniela
Núñez Martínez was being interrogated by three male members of the investigative police without the presence
of her mother or of a prosecutor of the Attorney General’s Office, despite
being a minor. She was asked who wore a short-sleeved, black and white
chequered shirt. When she answered that she didn’t know, the members of the investigative police went on with the
interrogation, and after binding her hands together with a belt, they asked the
same questions again. The girl denied again any knowledge and consequently the members of the investigative police threatened her to
accuse her of drug-dealing. Francis Daniela Núñez Martínez, after hearing that
her father was being beaten in the other room, declared that she did see the
young man with the shirt near the fence at the house taking out a gun. Francis
Daniela signed and put her finger prints on a statement that she did not read.
There is currently no information on what happened
with Mr. Jesus Alberto Vivas.
The International Secretariat of OMCT firmly condemns
the allegations of ill-treatment and physical and psychological torture
inflicted on Mr. Daniel Antonio Núñez and the minor Francis Daniela Núñez
Martínez. OMCT is deeply concerned about their safety and physical and
psychological integrity and that of other members of the Núñez Martínez family, of Mr. Jesús Alberto Vivas, and of all witnesses of the
above-mentioned events, and as such, calls on the highest competent authorities
of Venezuela to take the necessary steps to guarantee these.
OMCT urges that the statements given by Francis
Daniela Núñez and her father Mr. Daniel Antonio Núñez be declared null and
void, as they were coerced with threats, ill-treatment and psychological
torture; if necessary, Francis Daniela Núñez Martínez should be given the
opportunity to testify again in the presence of a prosecutor of the Attorney
General’s Office competent in child
protection matters in order to guarantee her right. OMCT
further calls upon the Venezuelan authorities to ensure that Francis Daniela
Núñez Martínez, Mr. Daniel Antonio Núñez and Mr. Jesús Alberto Vivas, be examined by a doctor to conduct
physical and psychological examinations.
OMCT urges the competent authorities of Venezuela to carry out a prompt, effective,
thorough, independent and impartial investigation into these events, and that its conclusions are made public, in order to
identify those responsible, to bring them before an independent, competent and
impartial civilian court, and to apply the criminal, civil and/or
administrative sanctions provided for by law.
OMCT recalls to the authorities to conform with Venezuelas’s international human rights obligations, in this case in particular, the
right not to be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment, and to bringing to justice those
responsible for violating these rights.
Action requested
Please write to the authorities in Venezuela urging them to:
        
i.                 
Take the most
appropriate measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of
the minor Francis Daniela Núñez Martínez, Mr. Daniel Antonio Núñez, Mr. Jesús
Alberto Vivas and the other members of the family, in particular of Ms. Alina
Martínez and as well as
of all the other people who have witnessed theses facts; 
       ii.                 
Carry out a prompt, effective,
thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the aforementioned human
rights violations, the result of which
must be made public, in order to bring those responsible before a
competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or
administrative sanctions as provided by law; 
      iii.                 
Declare
null and void the statements given by the minor Francis Daniela Núñez Martínez and Mr. Daniel Antonio Núñez, which were as mentioned
before obtained under coercion and physical and psychological
torture. If necessary Francis Daniela
should be given the opportunity to testify again in presence of a prosecutor of
the Attorney General’s Office, competent in child protection matters in order
to guarantee her rights; 
     iv.                 
Guarantee
the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country
in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.
 
Addresses
·        
President of the Republic, H.E. Hugo Chávez Frías. Palacio de
Miraflores, Caracas,
      Venezuela; Fax: + 58 212 806 3698 E-mail: dggcomunicacional@presidencia.gob.ve 
         Tel.: + 58
212 806 3111 + 58 212 806 3229
·        
Citizen Luisa Ortega Díaz, General Attorney of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, Esquina de Misericordia a Pele el Ojo. Av. México. Caracas. E-mail: mp@fiscalia.gov.ve Fax: + 58 212 575 4467 Tels.:
+ 58 212 509 7211 + 58 212 509 7464
·        
Citizen Tareck El Aissami, Ministro del Poder Popular para las Relaciones
Interiores y Justicia, Av. Urdaneta, Animas Plaza España,
Centro Financiero Latino, P-28, Caracas.
      Fax: + 58 212
505 3157 + 58 212 505 3159 + 58 212 506 1557   + 58 212 506 1064
         Tel.: + 58 212 505
3153 + 58 212 505 3156
·        
Citizen Wilmer
Flores Trosel, Comisario General, Director General del Cuerpo de Investigaciones
Científicas, Penales y Criminalísticas, Avenida
Urdaneta, de Pelota a Punceres, Edif. CICPC, Caracas. Tels.: + 58 212 443 2652
·        
Citizen Carla
Ferreira, Fiscalía Nº 126 con Competencia en Derechos Fundamentales, Edificio
Sede del Ministerio Público, Esquina
de Ánimas. Av. Urdaneta, Caracas, E-mail: fcaracas@fiscalia.gov.ve  Fax: + 58 212 4086974
·        
Citizen Gabriela Ramírez Pérez, Defensora del Pueblo de
la República Bolivariana de Venezuela, Av.
Urdaneta, Animas Plaza España, Centro Financiero Latino, P-28, Caracas.
      Fax: + 58 212 575
4467 E-mail: denuncias@defensoria.gob.ve Esta
dirección electrónica esta protegida contra spam bots. Necesita activar
JavaScript para visualizarla       dmetropolitana@defensoria.gob.ve Tels.: + 58 212 505 3153 + 58 212 505 3156
·        
H.E. Germán Mundaraín Hernández, Permanent Mission of Venezuela to the United Nations in Geneva, 18-a, Chemin
François-Lehmann, 1218, Geneva, Switzerland. FAX:+ 41 22 723 28 81;  E-mail:   mission.venezuela@ties.itu.int
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela in your respective country.
 
Geneva,
4 February 2011
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.
 



[1] This is a
summary of the case. For the complete case, please check the original version. 