Uzbekistan:  Uzbekistan - arbitrary detention and torture of Mr. Sanjar Umarov
November  1, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Uzbekistan / 2005 / NovemberUzbekistan: Uzbekistan - arbitrary detention and torture of Mr. Sanjar UmarovCase UZB 011105Arbitrary detention / Torture  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Uzbekistan.  Brief description of the situationThe International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Legal Aid Society, a member of the OMCT network, of the arbitrary detention and ill-treatment of Mr. Sanjar Umarov, opposition leader and a vocal critic of the government of Uzbekistan.  According to the information received, Mr. Umarov was arrested on Saturday 22nd October, charged with stealing an undisclosed sum of money through his business dealings. When his lawyer went to visit him on Tuesday 25th October he found his client in his cell naked on the floor of his cell, his hands covering his face. He did not respond to his name. His lawyer wrote “that I cannot conduct any interview with him in his current state, and that he needs immediate medical attention and expertise concerning his current condition and illness.” Mr. Umarov had reportedly passed a message from jail to his supporters, following his arrest, saying that the authorities had exerted pressure on him and threatened to inject him with drugs.  OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Umarov.  Action requestedPlease write to the authorities in Uzbekistan urging them to: i.	Take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Umarov and guarantee that he be provided immediately with medical assistance; ii.	Ensure that the procedural rights of Mr. Umarov are guaranteed at all times; iii.	Order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events, notably the allegations of torture, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iv.	Guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with international human rights standards. : AddressesPresident of Uzbekistan, Islam Abduganiyevich Karimov, ul. Uzbekistanskaya 43, Rezidentsia prezidenta, 700163 Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan, Fax: +998 71 133 7258, E-mail: presidents_office@press-service.uz Parliamentary Commissioner for Human Rights, Sayora Rashidova, ul. Xalqlar Dostligi 1, 700035 Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan, Fax: +998 71 139 85 55, E-mail: office@ombudsman.gov.uz  Chairman of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Ubaydulla Mingbaev, Respublika Uzbekistan; 700183 g. Tashkent; ul. Abdulla Kodiri, 1; Verkhovny Sud Respubliki Uzbekistan General Prosecutor of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Rashidjon Hamidovich Kodirov, ul. Gulyamova 66, 700047 Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan, Fax: +998 71 133 39 17, E-mail: prokuratura@lawyer.com Ambassador of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Uzbekistan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 1853, 1215 Geneva 15, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 799 43 02, E-mail: uzbekistan@bluewin.ch Please also write to the embassies of Uzbekistan in your respective country.  Geneva, 1st November 2005  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 