Azerbaijan:  Open Letter: Call for an immediate end to crackdown against human rights defenders
December 18, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Azerbaijan / 2014 / DecemberAzerbaijan: Open Letter: Call for an immediate end to crackdown against human rights defendersAzerbaijan_OpenLetter_1712143 pages / 181 KB

Attn. Mr. Ilham Aliyev

		President of the Republic of Azerbaijan

		Fax: +994 12 492 06 25, +994 412 92 28 68

		E-mail: office@pa.gov.az, office@apparat.gov.az

		 

Prosecutor’s Office

		Fax: +994 12 492 06 82, +994 12 492 26 63

		E-mail: eldar_sultanov@prosecutor.gov.az

		 

Mr. Fikrat F. Mammadov

		Minister of Justice in Azerbaijan

		E-mail: contact@justice.gov.az

		Fax + 99412 430 09 81

		 

Paris-Geneva, December 18, 2014

		 

		 

Re: Call for an immediate end to crackdown against human rights 
defenders

		 

		Excellencies,

		 

		The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the 
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), strongly condemns the 
intensifying crackdown against human rights defenders in Azerbaijan.

		 

		In 2014, despite the release of two human rights defenders, Messrs 
 Hasan Huseynli and Emil Mammadov, five others 
have been arrested and remain in arbitrary, pre-trial detention: Ms. 
 Leyla Yunus, Director of the Institute of Peace and Democracy 
(IPD) and a member of OMCT General Assembly, Mr. Arif 
Yunusov, Head of the Conflictology Department of IPD, Mr. 
Intigam Aliyev, a human rights lawyer, Head of the Legal Education 
Society, and Mr. Rasul Jafarov, an active participant in 
"Sing for Democracy" and "Art for Democracy", and Ms. 
 Khadija Ismailova, an independent investigative journalist 
in Azerbaijan. In addition, two other defenders, Messrs. Anar 
Mammadli, Chairperson of the Election Monitoring and Democracy 
Studies Centre (EMDSC) and Bashir Suleymani, Executive 
Director of EMDSC, were sentenced in May 2014 by the Court on Grave Crimes 
to respectively  5,5 years’ and 3,5 years’ imprisonment on 
charges of “tax evasion”, “illegal 
entrepreneurship”, and “abuse of authority”, in the 
framework of trials which failed to comply with international standards. In 
total, eight defenders are currently behind bars.

		 

		The past days witnessed another wave of harassment against a number of 
those above-mentioned, in an attempt to further sanction their human rights 
activities:

		 

		- On December 15, 2014, the Observatory was informed that heavier charges 
were brought against Mr. Intigam Aliyev, for “large-scale 
misappropriation and embezzlement” (Article 179.3.2 of the Criminal 
Code), punishable by up to 12 years in prison. On October 24, 2014, his 
pre-trial detention was extended to February 8, 2015. Mr. Aliyev is 
currently awaiting trial.

		 

		- Similarly, on December 12, 2014, the Observatory was informed that new 
charges of “forgery” and “misappropriation” were 
brought against Mr. Rasul Jafarov, under Articles 313 and 179.3.2 of the 
Criminal Code of Azerbaijan, also punishable by up to 12 years in prison. 
Mr. Jafarov was previously sentenced to pre-trial detention on criminal 
charges such as “treason” (Article 274 of the Criminal Code), 
“large-scale fraud” (Article (178.3.2), “falsification of 
documents” (Article 320), “tax evasion” (Article 213), and 
“illegal business” (Article 192) or “abuse of 
authority” (Article 308.2). He is currently awaiting trial.

		 

		- In addition, concerns remain about repeated reports of ill-treatment and 
bad health condition of Ms. Leyla Yunus. The latest incident took place on 
December 11, 2014, when Ms. Yunus was transferred into solitary confinement 
in a punishment cell for more than a day, because of an anxious behaviour 
and refusal to be examined by doctors. Concerns remain about her physical 
and psychological integrity (see Observatory Press Release of November 27, 
2014). Ms. Yunus is facing the same above-mentioned charges of 
“treason”, “large-scale fraud”, “falsification 
of documents”, “tax evasion”, “illegal 
business” and “abuse of authority”. On October 24, 2014, 
her pre-trial detention was extended until February 28, 2015. She is 
currently awaiting trial.

		 

		- On December 5, 2014, Ms. Khadija Ismailova was sentenced to two months 
of pre-trial detention under accusations of “inciting to 
suicide” on the basis of Article 125 of the Criminal Code. The charges 
relate to an investigation opened in late October, after her former 
boyfriend, Mr. Tural Mustafayev, accused her of driving him to commit 
suicide. Before being presented to the court on December 5, Ms. Ismailova 
had been summonsed for an interrogation by the prosecutor’s office. On 
the eve of the charges, the head of the presidential administration, Mr. 
Ramiz Mekhtiev, had made a speech about so-called “double standards of 
the world order and contemporary Azerbaijan”. On this occasion, he had 
accused, amongst others, Ms. Ismailova of propagating “heinous ideas 
towards Azerbaijan”. The Observatory fears that this detention might 
be a measure of reprisals against Ms. Ismailova, in connection with her 
professional activities. Previously, on September 5, 2014, Ms. Ismailova had 
been held for two hours at Baku airport as she was returning from an OSCE 
meeting organised in Tbilisi. On October 5, 2014, she was again retained at 
the airport for several hours after a trip to Strasbourg, where she had met 
with officials of the Council of Europe. In addition, on October 12, 2014 
and November 18, 2014, she was banned twice from leaving the country[1].

		 

		The Observatory is also preoccupied over the recent dismissal from the Bar 
Association of lawyer Khalid Baghirov, the legal representative of Messrs. 
Arif Yunusov and Rasul Jafarov. On November 5, 2014, Mr. Khalid Baghirov had 
already been dismissed from the case of Ms. Leyla Yunus.

		 

		The Observatory is further concerned over information received about the 
impossibility for a delegation of the Venice Commission to visit Azerbaijan, 
in spite of an official request submitted to the authorities. On December 
15, 2014, the Venice Commission adopted an Opinion, calling on Azerbaijan to 
repeal the amendments to the Law on Amendments to the Law on 
Non-Governmental Organisations (Public Unions and Foundations)[2]. A new “anti-NGO” 
law, adopted in 2014, provides the authorities with additional powers for 
temporary suspension and permanent banning of national and foreign NGOs, and 
introduce additional administrative requirements and increased checks.

		 

		In the light of the ongoing and intensifying crackdown on civil society in 
Azerbaijan since summer 2014, the Observatorycalls on the authorities 
to:

		 

		- Immediately and unconditionally release all detained human rights 
defenders, since their detentions are arbitrary and only aim at sanctioning 
their human rights activities;

		 

		- Guarantee the right to defence of all detained human rights defenders by 
putting an end to the practice of depriving human rights defenders of their 
lawyers by calling them as witnesses of the cases;

		 

		- Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity 
of all detained human rights defenders, and all human rights defenders in 
Azerbaijan;

		 

		- Put an end to any kind of harassment - including at the judicial and 
investigatory levels - against all detained human rights defenders, and more 
generally all human rights defenders in Azerbaijan;

		 

		- Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 
9, 1998, especially:

		 

		Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually 
and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection 
and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and 
international levels”;

		Article 5, which underscores the right of every individual to form, join, 
and participate in nongovernmental organizations; and

		Article 12.2, which provides that the State shall “take all 
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of 
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, 
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure 
or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate 
exercise of his or her rights”;

		 

		- Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental 
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and 
international instruments ratified by Azerbaijan.

		 

		In the hope that you will take these requests in consideration, we remain 
at your disposal for any further information,

		 

Karim LAHIDJI, FIDH President

Gerald STABEROCK, OMCT Secretary General

		 





[1] 
              
Ms. Ismailova is also facing another trial since October 3, in the framework 
of the claim of a political activist, Mr. Elman Türkoglu, who accused 
her of defamation.



[2] 
              
See  
http://www.venice.coe.int/webforms/documents/?pdf=CDL-AD(2014)043-e 
. 