Greece:  35th Session of the UN Human Rights Council: Written submission on the situation of minority rights defenders in Greece
May 25, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Reports and Publications / Greece / 2017 / MayGreece: 35th Session of the UN Human Rights Council: Written submission on the situation of minority rights defenders in Greece

1.     Background
 
The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
expresses its deep concern about the situation of human rights defenders (HRDs)
dealing with minority rights in Greece. These HRDs are consistently targeted
for their legitimate work and face different types of attacks, surveillance,
arbitrary arrests, detentions, ill-treatment, entry bans and expulsion.
 
In Greece, many individuals who define
themselves as members of an ethnic minority group find it difficult to express
their identity freely and to maintain their culture. Turks and Macedonians continue to face discrimination, denial
of ethnic identity, harassment, and violation of freedom of association.[1] HRDs play critical role in preventing,
mitigating and ensuring accountability of human rights abuses of these groups.
Despite this, there are increasing reports of HRDs, who advocate for minority
rights in Greece, being the subject of ongoing harassment.

Several of the individual cases of intimidation
described below illustrate obstacles to HRDs work on
the ground of posing threat to national security, which appears only to be
aimed at sanctioning their legitimate human rights activities. These cases
take place in a bigger context of systematic harassment of minority rights
defenders in Greece. 
 
2.    
Harassment of minority
rights defenders in Greece
 
2.1. On December 12, 2016, six members of
Parliament (MP) from the Greek far-right party ‘Golden Dawn’ (GD) and several
other GD members violently interrupted a conference on ‘National Minorities in
Greece and Recommendations from International Organisations’, organised by the
NGO Greek Helsinki Monitor (GHM) and the Party of Friendship, Equality and
Peace (DEB).[2] Participants in the event were verbally
abused and threatened, including death threats. The GD members also shouted
racist slogans such as ‘Turks are not welcome in Greece’. The Greek police did
not take any measure to protect the integrity of the participants nor to ensure
their freedom of speech and association, although they had been formally asked
to and had given assurances that they would provide security. Moreover, the
Greek Prosecution Office did not initiate any ex officio proceedings following
the violent attack.[3] GHM and DEB subsequently filed a complaint with the Racist Violence Prosecutor but as of May 2017
it was not known whether it had led to any action by the Prosecutor. 
 
2.2. On October 24, 2016, Mr Slavko Mangovski,
International Coordinator of the Macedonian Human Rights Movement International
(MHRMI), with US and Macedonian citizenships, was denied entrance to
Greece when he was travelling to meet with Macedonian
minority activists. Mr Mangovski might have been listed on the National
List of Undesirable Persons following his
participation in the 65th anniversary of the ‘Macedonian Children Refugees from
the Greek Civil War’ in Toronto in June 2013.[4] Mr Mangovski was again denied
entry on April 22, 2017, when he came to formally authorize GHM to appeal
against the first ban of entry.
 
2.3. On August 30, 2016, Mr Mustafa Kaymakçı, a Turkish citizen
born in the now Greek Dodecanese Islands and President of the Izmir (Turkey)
based organisation ‘Rhodes, Kos and the Dodecanese Turks Culture and Solidarity
Association’, was arbitrarily detained, before being expelled on August 31 and
banned from the Greek territory while he was conducting a fact-finding mission
about Turkish minorities in Greece. During his detention at Kos police station,
he was held in an overcrowded 30 square meters’ room with only a small window,
together with 20 other persons, in conditions amounting to ill-treatment.[5] 
 
2.4. On November 8,
2014, GHM-affiliated Macedonian human rights lawyer Ms Trandaflika Sandeva was declared persona non grata and banned from entering Greece. She was heading
towards Thessaloniki to meet with GHM so as to legally represent Macedonian families
in cases involving their properties, which they lost during the Greek Civil
War. Following a parliamentary question filed in 2014 by then Democratic Left
MP Ms Maria Yannakaki, who is currently General Secretary for Human Rights, the
ban was not renewed and Ms Sandeva was allowed entry in Greece in February
2016. However, she was again denied entry on March 23 and April 22, 2017, when
she came to formally authorize GHM to appeal against the previous ban of entry.
It is feared that the only reason for these bans is her work as GHM-affiliated
lawyer. 
 
2.5. On June 3, 2013, two
Macedonian journalists, Mr Goran
Momirovski and Ms Ivana Kostovska,
were banned from entering Greece for posing threats to the public and internal
security of the country, after filming a documentary about the daily life and
struggles of the Macedonian minority in Greece. They were declared personae non grata, and were handed
official documents describing them as ‘dangerous’ and ‘enemies of the State’.
2.6. On August 19, 2012, Mr Marin Mema, an Albanian reporter, was
similarly declared a ‘threat to national security’ and denied entry to the
country by the Greek authorities, after he released a documentary about the Çam
community, an Albanian minority expelled from northern Greece during the Second
World War and has since never been allowed to return. 
3.     Non-compliance with international human rights obligations 
 
OMCT is concerned about the ongoing harassment and
pattern of restriction of movement of minority rights defenders. The UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
as well as numerous Human Rights Council resolutions and reports by Special
Procedures have underlined the importance of HRDs in contributing to the
implementation of human rights law. 
 
The UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders
states that defenders have an important role to play and an essential
responsibility in safeguarding democracy, promoting human rights and
fundamental freedoms and contributing to the promotion and advancement of
democratic societies, institutions and processes.[6] In 2013, the UN Human Rights Council stressed that respect and support for the
activities of HRDs is essential to the overall enjoyment of human rights.[7] The UN
Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights Defenders also stated
that ‘the defence and promotion of human rights is a legitimate and courageous
activity which is necessary to ensure that communities can fully enjoy their
entitlements and realise their potential. Defenders can play a key role in
safeguarding democracy and ensuring that it remains open, pluralistic and
participatory and in line with the principles of rule of law and good
governance. Defenders should be able to carry out their activities in an
environment that empowers them to defend all human rights for all’.[8] 
 
It is the duty of the State to guarantee a safe and
enabling environment for HRDs so that they can carry out their legitimate
activities. While minority rights defenders face threats and harassment by the
Greek authorities, the promotion and protection of human rights in the country
is undermined. 
 
4.     Recommendations
 
In light of the above facts, OMCT calls
upon the UN Human Rights Council to urge Greece to:
·      
Guarantee a safe and
enabling environment for all HRDs in Greece so that
they are able to carry out their work without hindrance.
·       Guarantee in all circumstances the
physical and psychological integrity of all HRDs, including minority
rights defenders, in Greece.
·      
Put
an end to all acts of harassment against minority rights defenders in Greece.
·      
Guarantee the
freedoms of movement, peaceful assembly and association of all HRDs, in
compliance with articles 12, 21 and 22 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights (ICCPR). 
·      
In particular, guarantee the freedom of movement of all minority rights
defenders, including by immediately and
unconditionally lifting the prohibition to enter Greece that was posed against
them, as it only aims at sanctioning their legitimate human rights activities.
·      
Conform to the
provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the
General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially articles
1 and 12.2.
·      
More generally, ensure
in all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with
international and regional human rights instruments ratified by Greece. 


[1] The European Commission against Racism and Intolerance, in its
fifth report on Greece in 2015, noted that only two schools in the Thrace
region provided secondary bilingual education for minority children in Greek
and Turkish (https://racistcrimeswatch.wordpress.com/2017/03/03/1-260).
Further, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe’s Committee on
Legal Affairs and Human Rights addressed violations of rights of Greek citizens
of Turkish descent in Rhodes and Kos in its February 2011 report (http://assembly.coe.int/ASP/Doc/XrefViewHTML.asp?FileID=12646&Language=EN).
On August 26, 2016, the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination expressed concern in its Concluding Observations on Greece
regarding the treatment of ethnic minorities in the country and denial of their
right to self-identification (http://daccess-ods.un.org/access.nsf/Get?Open&DS=CERD/C/GRC/CO/20-22&Lang=E).


[2] The Party was founded in 1991 to represent
the interest of the Turkish minority in Greece.


[3] OMCT Urgent Appeal GRE
060117, http://www.omct.org/human-rights-defenders/urgent-interventions/greece/2017/01/d24144/



[4] OMCT Urgent Appeal GRE 181116, http://www.omct.org/human-rights-defenders/urgent-interventions/greece/2016/11/d24064/ 


[5] OMCT Urgent Appeal GRE 261016, http://www.omct.org/human-rights-defenders/urgent-interventions/greece/2016/10/d24016/ 


[6] General Assembly Resolution, UN Document
A/RES/53/144, article 18, March 1999.


[7] Human Rights Council Resolution 22/6, UN
Document A/HRC/22/6, April 2013.


[8] Report of the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights defenders, Margaret Sekaggya, UN Document A/HRC/25/55,
para. 60, December 2013. 