Cambodia:  CSOs call on Appeal Court to overturn the unjust conviction of Tep Vanny and to #FreeTepVanny
July 26, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2017 / JulyCambodia: CSOs call on Appeal Court to overturn the unjust conviction of Tep Vanny and to #FreeTepVanny





JOINT STATEMENT: CSOs call on Appeal Court to overturn the unjust
conviction of land activist and human rights defender Tep Vanny; for an end to
judicial harassment against her, and for her release from prison #FreeTepVanny
 
Phnom Penh, 26 July 2017 - We, the
undersigned, call on the Court of Appeal to overturn the unjust conviction of
Ms. Tep Vanny on charges of
intentional violence with aggravating circumstances based on her peaceful
activism at a 2013 protest, for which she received a draconian sentence of two
years and six months’ imprisonment on 23 February 2017. The Court of Appeal
will hear Ms. Tep Vanny’s appeal against conviction tomorrow, 27 July 2017. On
15 August 2017, Ms. Tep Vanny will have spent one year in detention; her
imprisonment is a clear attempt to silence one of Cambodia’s most fearless and
outspoken defenders of human rights ahead of the national elections in July
2018.
 
Tomorrow’s
appeal is one of three previously dormant years-old cases punitively
reactivated against Ms. Tep Vanny. In August 2016 the prosecutor of the Phnom
Penh Municipal Court reactivated the long-dormant charges of intentional
violence with aggravating circumstances against Ms. Tep Vanny while she was in
pre-trial detention prior to her spurious conviction on other charges for
taking part in a “Black Monday” protest to call for the release of the “Freethe5KH”
detainees,[1] who
were being held in arbitrary pre-trial detention at the time.[2] The
case under appeal dates back to Ms. Tep Vanny’s participation in a 2013
peaceful protest in front of Prime Minister Hun Sen’s house, during which a
group of Boeung Kak Lake activists called for the release of a detained fellow
community member. This protest had ended in violence against protesters at the
hands of Daun Penh security guards, in which Ms. Tep Vanny herself was
injured.  On 23 February 2017, Ms. Tep Vanny was convicted on these
charges and sentenced to 30 months in prison and a fine of five million riel
(about US$1,250), as well as being ordered to pay compensation totaling nine
million riel (about US$2,250) to the plaintiffs, two Daun Penh security guards.
 
Ms. Tep
Vanny’s trial did not comply with international standards for fair trial rights:
no credible evidence was presented to justify the charges against her and
neither the plaintiffs nor any prosecution witnesses gave live testimony at
either of the two hearings; instead only written statements were provided,
preventing cross-examination. Community members outside the court faced
unprovoked violence from para-police and, following delivery of the verdict,
riot police entered the court room and physically restrained a number of
defense witnesses.[3]
 
The
re-opening of these charges appears to be a politically motivated attempt to
restrict and punish Ms. Tep Vanny’s work as a land activist and human rights
defender, as part of the Cambodian authorities’ ongoing crackdown on dissenting
voices. Peaceful assembly and free expression are not crimes, and human rights
defenders should not be penalized for peacefully exercising their fundamental
freedoms. We call on the Court of Appeal to exercise its independence and
rectify the injustice of Ms. Tep Vanny’s flawed trial by overturning her
conviction and sentence. We call on the Cambodian authorities to cease their
judicial harassment of Ms. Tep Vanny, as well as other Boeung Kak Lake
activists, and to release her from prison.
 
This joint statement is endorsed by:
1.       Amnesty International
2.       Boeung Kak Community
3.       Boeung Trabek Community
4.       Cambodian Center for Human Rights (CCHR)
5.       Cambodian Human Rights and Development
Association (ADHOC)
6.       Cambodian Independent Teacher Association
(CITA)
7.       Cambodian Indigenous Youth Association (CIYA)
8.       Cambodian League for the Promotion and Defense
of Human Rights
9.       Cambodian Youth Network
10.     Coalition for Integrity & Social
Accountability
11.     Community Legal Education Center
12.     Equitable Cambodia (EC)
13.     FIDH, in the framework of the Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
14.     Forum Asia 
15.     Human Rights Watch​​ (HRW)
16.     Indigenous Youth at Prome Community, Preah
Vihear Province
17.     Indradevi Association (IDA)
18.     Land Community, I Village Preah Sihanouk
province 
19.     Land Community, Prek Chik Village, Koh Kong
20.     Land Conflict Community, Skun Village, Siem
Reap province
21.     Lor Peang Community, Kampong Chhnang Province 
22.     Ponlok Khmer
23.     Progressive Voice (Myanmar) 
24.     Railway Station, Tuol Sangkae A Community
25.     SOS International Airport Community
26.     The Alliance for Conflict Transformation 
27.     World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), in
the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders




[1] See Joint
Statement, “Civil Society Calls for Immediate Release of Boeung Kak Lake
Activists” (18 August 2016) http://bit.ly/2vQD6PM.  


[2] Four staff
members of the Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association (“ADHOC”),
Lim Mony, Ny Sokha, Yi Soksan and Nay Vanda, as well as Deputy Secretary
General of the National Election Committee (and former ADHOC staff member) Ny
Chakrya. All five human rights defenders were released on bail on 29 June 2017.
See https://freethe5kh.net/campaign-updates/


[3] See Joint
Statement: Tep Vanny Convicted Again as Para-Police Attack Supporters (23 February
2017) http://bit.ly/2kSiJ40 