India:  Killing of Mr. Niyamat Ansari, human rights defender of workers' rights
March 24, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / India / 2011 / MarchIndia: Killing of Mr. Niyamat Ansari, human rights defender of workers' rightsKilling of Mr. Niyamat Ansari3 pages / 172 KB

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

IND 003 / 0311 / OBS 044
Killing / Death threats
India
March 24, 2011

The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in India.
Description of the situation:
The Observatory has been informed by People's Watch of
the killing of Mr. Niyamat Ansari, human rights activist engaged in the
defence of workers’ rights in Manika Block, Latehar District, State of
Jharkhand, as well as of death threats received by his associate Mr. Bhukhan
Singh. Mr. Niyamat Ansari was
notablydocumenting cases of corruption related to the
implementation of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
(MGNREGA)[1].
According to the information received, on March 2, 2011, a group of armed men came to the
residence of Mr. Niyamat Ansari, in the locality of Jerua, in the village of
Kope. They took him away and reportedly brutally beat him for nearly one hour.
After they left the village, members of his family found him unconscious and
carried him by foot over a distance of ten kilometres, from Jerua village to
Manika police station, where an ambulance was sent to bring him to Latehar
Sadar Hospital. Mr. Niyamat Ansari died soon after reaching the hospital.
The armed men were allegedly also seeking Mr. Bhukhan
Singh, but the latter was able to hide. 
The killing of Mr. Niyamat Ansari is believed to be
related to his work in favour of workers subjected to the MGNREGA and his
denunciation of corruption in relation to this employment scheme in the State
of Jharkhand. 
On March 3, 2011, the police of
Latehar recorded a First Information Report (FIR)[2], based on the statements of the sister of the deceased, against
seven private local contractors or their associates and against Mr. Sudarshan,
a local Maoist leader belonging to the Koel Sankh zone of Communist Party of
India of Pratappur block in Chatra district, also believed to be involved in
the murder. To date, only one of the private contractors has reportedly been
arrested.
On March 5, 2011, the local newspapers Prabhat
Khabar and Dainik Bhaskar published a statement written by the South
Latehar Sub-zonal Committee of the Communist Party of India, claiming
responsibility for the murder, and warning Mr. Bhukhan Singh that if he
remained under police protection, he would meet the same fate. 
In an interview to the New Delhi newspaper The
Telegraph dated March 21, 2011, Mr. B.K. Sinha, the Secretary of the
Department of Rural Development of the Ministry of Rural Development, recognised
that the killing of Mr. Niyamat Ansari was linked to his activities related to
MNREGA. He announced that he would send a team of experts to Jharkhand to “see
how the system worked and identify deficiencies” in the implementation of the Mahatma
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme which, according to him, has
been taken over by a contractors’ mafia allegedly behind the murder of Mr.
Niyamat Ansari. Mr. Sinha also said that if his
department was not satisfied with the investigations on the murder, it could
ask a central agency to take over the case, as provided under Section 27(2) of
the MNREGA.
The Observatory expresses its deepest concern about
the killing of Mr. Niyamat Ansari, which merely seems to aim at
sanctioning his human rights activities, and urges the Indian authorities to order an immediate,
thorough and impartial investigation into his assassination, prosecute all
those responsible and try them before a competent and impartial tribunal. The
Observatory also calls on the Indian authorities to guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological
integrity of Mr. Bhukhan Singh.
Background information:
Since MGNREGA was launched in 2006, Mr. Niyamat Ansari and Mr. Bhukhan Singh have been working for the
rights of workers subjected to the MGNREGA, particularly through the support of
several cases of demands for unemployment allowance at the Latehar People’s
Court, which were accepted in February 2009. In the framework of their legal activities
in favour of these workers, Mr.
Niyamat Ansari and Mr.
Bhukhan Singh also collected information and investigated cases of corruption,
especially by private contractors taking financial advantage of this employment
system in Jharkhand. 
In February 2011, Mr. Niyamat Ansari exposed a case of embezzlement
of 250,000 Rupees (US$ 55,280) from funds which should have been allocated to
workers subjected to
the MGNREGA in the village of Rankikala. On March 1, 2011, the day
before the killing of Mr. Niyamat Ansari, a FIR was lodged against the former
Manika Block Development Officer (BDO) and another local administration’s staff
member suspected to be responsible for the scam. Later on, more than 200,000
Rupees were reportedly recovered from the former BDO.
Actions requested:
The Observatory urges the authorities of India to:
i.             
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
of Mr. Bhukhan Singh and of
all human rights defenders in India;
ii.            
Order an immediate, thorough, effective and impartial investigation into
the killing of Mr. Niyamat Ansari and death threats against Mr. Bhukhan Singh, the result of which must be made public, in order to
identify all those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and
impartial tribunal and apply to them the penal sanctions provided by the law;
iii.           
Put an end to acts of harassment and threats faced by defenders of
socials and economical rights in India, and more generally by all human rights
defenders;
iv.          
Conform to the
provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9,
1998, especially:
- its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the
right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive
for the protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at
the national and international levels”;
- its Article 6(a), which provides that “everyone has
the right, individually and in associations with others, to know, seek, obtain,
receive and hold information about all human rights and fundamental freedoms”;
- its Article 9.3 (a) and (c), which states that
“everyone has the right, individually and in associations with others, to
complain about the policies and actions of individual officials and
governmental bodies with regards to violations of human rights and fundamental
freedom by petition or other appropriate means, to competent domestic judicial,
administrative or legislative authorities or any other competent authority
provided for by the legal system of the State, which should render their
decision on the complaint without undue delay [...] to offer and provide professionally qualified legal
assistance or other relevant advice and assistance in defending human rights
and fundamental freedoms”;
- and its Article 12.2, which provides that “the
State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent
authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against
any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination,
pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her
legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”.
v.           
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by India.
Adresses:
·          
Shri
Manmohan Singh, Prime Minister of India, Prime Minister’s
Office, Room number 152, South Block, New Delhi, India. Fax:
+ 91 11 2301 6857 Email: pmosb@pmo.nic.in
·          
Dr.
P. Chidambaram, Union Minister of Home Affairs, Ministry of Home
Affairs, 104-107 North Block, New Delhi 110 001 India. Fax:
+91 11 2309 2979. Email: hm@nic.in
·          
Justice
Kapadia, Chief Justice of India and RK. Raghavan, Chairman of the Special
Investigation Team, Supreme Court, Tilak Marg, New Delhi -1,
India. Fax: +91 11 233 83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.in 
·          
Justice
K. G. Balkrishnan, Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission of
India, Faridkot House, Copernicus Marg, New Delhi 110 001, India. Tel: +91 11
230 74448, Fax: +91 11 2334 0016, Email: covdnhrc@nic.in ; ionhrc@nic.in
·          
Gopinathan,
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary Permanent Representative to the
United Nations (Geneva), Rue du Valais 9, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland. Tel: +41 22
906 86 86, Fax: +41 22 906 86 96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
·          
Embassy
of India in Brussels, 217 Chaussée de Vleurgat, 1050 Brussels, Belgium, Fax:
+32 (0)2 6489638 or +32 (0)2 6451869
Please also write to the
diplomatic representations of India in your respective countries.
*** 
Geneva-Paris, March 24, 2011 
Kindly inform us of any action
undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
The Observatory, an OMCT
and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and
aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
· E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
· Tel and fax OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
· Tel and fax FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80



[1]              
MNREGA is an Indian job
guarantee scheme which provides a legal guarantee for 100 days of employment in
every financial year to adult members of any rural household willing to do
public work-related unskilled manual work at the statutory minimum wage of US$
2.22 per day in 2009 prices. This act was introduced with the aim of improving
the purchasing power of the rural people, primarily semi or un-skilled work to
people living in rural India.


[2]               A First Information Report is a written
complaint filed at the police. 