Iran:  Punitive measures imposed on detained human rights defender must cease
October 19, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2012 / OctoberIran: Punitive measures imposed on detained human rights defender must cease


THE OBSERVATORY - PRESS RELEASE

 
IRAN: Punitive measures imposed on detained human rights defender
must cease
 
Paris-Geneva,
October 19, 2012. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), strongly condemns the
harassment faced by Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh and, more generally, denounces the
policy of subjecting jailed human rights defenders to punitive measures in
prison.
 
Since her arbitrary arrest and detention in September 2010, Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh, a human rights lawyer known for defending juveniles facing death
penalty, prisoners of conscience, human rights activists and children victims
of abuse and a member of the Defenders of Human Rights Centre (DHRC), who is
serving a six-year imprisonment sentence in Evin prison, has been subjected to increasingly restrictive and
clearly discriminative and arbitrary conditions of detention.
 
In recent weeks, Ms. Sotoudeh's visiting day has been changed from
Sunday to Wednesday without any legitimate ground being provided by the prison
authorities. In addition to being deprived of face-to-face family visits, the
new measure, which contravenes the prison's rules, has made it more and more
difficult for her to receive visits from her family over the past three months.
It is also to be recalled that Ms. Sotoudeh has been banned from making phone
calls since May 2011.
 
The Observatory recalls that punitive measures against Ms. Sotoudeh are
not new. Previously, Ms. Sotoudeh had been held for long periods in solitary
confinement and denied contact with her family and lawyer. She also reportedly
suffered acts of torture in prison in order to force her to confess. On July
11, the authorities banned her husband and her 12-year-old daughter from
travelling abroad. This case has now been referred to the Islamic Revolution
Court (Branch 28), which has summoned them to appear. 
 
To protest against these measures which violate her right to receive
unhindered visits by her family, Ms. Sotoudeh started an unlimited hunger
strike on October 17, raising further concerns for her physical integrity. It
should be recalled that she had already come close to death in 2010 after three
dry hunger strikes to protest her conditions of detention and violations of due
process during her trial.
 
“The conditions of detention imposed on Nasrin Sotoudeh are unacceptable
and clearly aim at imposing additional punishment on her for her human rights
activities”, declared Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH President.
 
“The punitive measures against Ms. Sotoudeh while in detention once more
illustrate the relentless policy of the Iranian authorities to stifle human
rights defenders, which should be strongly condemned by the whole international
community”, added Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General.
 
The Observatory firmly denounces the policy of harassment against Ms. Nasrin
Sotoudeh, through arbitrary detention, judicial harassment and punitive
measures in prison, which only aims at sanctioning her legitimate human rights
activities. It also urges the Iranian authorities to immediately and
unconditionally release her as well all other imprisoned human rights
defenders, and more generally to conform to the United Nations Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and international
human rights instruments ratified by Iran.
 
For further information, please contact:
·      
FIDH: Arthur Manet / Audrey Couprie: + 33 1 43 55 25 18
·       OMCT: Delphine Reculeau : + 41 22 809 49 39 