Chad:  Chad: arrest and detention/disappearance
January 20, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Chad / 2000 / JanuaryChad: Chad: arrest and detention/disappearanceCase TCD 200100   The International Secretariat of the OMCT requests your URGENT intervention regarding the following situation in Chad.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received information from the « Association pour les Victimes de la Repression en Exil, AVRE », member of the OMCT network, that Nasour Aware was arrested at his home in Ndjamena during the night of 26th December 1999 by agents of the GSP (Groupement de la Sécurité Présidentielle).  Since 26th December 1999, his whereabouts as well as the reason for his arrest is unknown.  According to the information, Nasour Aware was a friend of and collaborated in business with Bichara Digui (executed in the middle of the street in Ndjaména in the summer of 1997).  Following the death of Bichara Digui, Aware frequently visited the family of Digui, particularly his younger brother Ahmat Digui.  As such there is reason to believe that there is a connection between these links with the family of Bichara Digui who is still the target of harassment by the authorities, and the disappearance of Nasour Aware.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities of Chad urging them to :  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Nasour Aware; ii.	immediately locate the whereabouts and order his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights in all times; iii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the arrest and disappearance of Nasour Aware in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.   Addresses  Président Idriss Déby, Président de la République, Présidence de la République BP 74 N’Djaména, République du Tchad, Fax:  +235.514501  Monsieur Routouang Yoma Golou, Ministre de la Justice, Garde des Sceaux, Ministère de la Justice N’Djaména, République du Tchad, Fax: +235.52.5885  Procureur Général de la République, République de la Tchad, Procureur Général de la République, Palais de Justice, N'Djaména, République du Tchad Telegrams:     Procureur Général, N'Djaména, Tchad  Diplomatic representatives of Chad accredited to your country. Geneva, 20th January 2000 