Bahrain:  Twenty-Six NGOs Call for Immediate and Unconditional Release of Bahraini Human Rights Defender Nabeel Rajab, Prior to His Trial Tomorrow
July 11, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2016 / JulyBahrain: Twenty-Six NGOs Call for Immediate and Unconditional Release of Bahraini Human Rights Defender Nabeel Rajab, Prior to His Trial TomorrowTomorrow, 12 July 2016, the trial of the prominent human rights defender 
Nabeel Rajab begins. Facing charges related to comments on 
the social media website Twitter, Rajab may be sentenced to more than ten 
years in prison. We, the undersigned NGOs, hold the government of Bahrain 
responsible for the deterioration of Rajab’s health due to poor 
detention conditions. We call on the Bahraini authorities to immediately and 
unconditionally release Rajab, and to drop all charges against him.

 

Rajab is a leading Bahraini human rights defender, well known in the 
region - and worldwide - for his defense of human rights, and his efforts 
towards more freedom for all. As a result of his work he has been repeatedly 
jailed. He is the President of the Bahrain Center for Human Rights (BCHR), 
Founding Director of the regional Gulf Center for Human Rights (GCHR), 
Deputy Secretary General of the International Federation for Human Rights 
(FIDH) and is also on the Advisory Committee of Human Rights Watch’s 
Middle East Division.

 

On 13 June 2016, in the early hours of the morning, Rajab was arrested 
without any declared reason. He was not informed of his charges until the 
following day,, when he was brought before the public prosecution and 
officially charged with "spreading false news and rumors about the 
internal situation in a bid to discredit Bahrain." He was then remanded 
to seven days in custody pending investigation. This charge was in response 
to statements he gave during past television interviews in early 2015 and 
2016.

 

On 28 June 2016, Rajab was transferred to the Bahrain Defense 
Hospital’s Coronary Care Unit for an irregular heartbeat. His family 
was informed that he is also suffering from high blood pressure, a condition 
for which he was treated two years ago. Despite his weak condition, he was 
hastily transported from the Coronary Unit back to jail the following 
day.

 

Since the arrest, Rajab has been detained in extremely poor conditions in 
solitary confinement. His cell is filthy, the toilet and shower are unclean 
and unhygienic, and there is little or no clean water in the bathroom. These 
conditions have been detrimental to Rajab’s health; he has lost eight 
kgs in just two weeks. Blood tests have shown that he has acquired both a 
urinary tract infection and low mononucleosis, and he is awaiting the 
results of additional screenings. Rajab also needs surgery to treat 
gallstones and an enlarged gallbladder. He is also suffering from an 
enlarged prostate and needs to be seen by a hematologist. His surgeries will 
not be scheduled before August.

 

On 26 June 2016, the authorities notified Rajab that his first court 
hearing for another case would be for 12 July 2016. This separate case 
is  related to other tweets and retweets about Jau prison and the war 
in Yemen, which were posted in 2015. He may face up to 13 years in prison if 
found guilty, and the authorities have ordered that Rajab remain in 
detention until his hearing.

 

We remind the Bahraini government of its obligation to preserve the right 
to free expression under article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil 
and Political Rights, to which Bahrain acceded in 2006. We call for action 
to be taken to guarantee and protect the health of human rights defender 
Nabeel Rajab from further deterioration. We reiterate repeated calls by 
United Nations officials, and others in the international community, to 
immediately release Rajab.

 

 

The Signatories 

 

Bahrain Center for Human Rights (BCHR)

Americans for Democracy & Human Rights in Bahrain (ADHRB)

Amnesty Denmark

Bahrain Institute for Rights and Democracy (BIRD)

Bahrain Interfaith

Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies (CIHRS)

Canadian Journalists for Free Expression (CJFE)

CIVICUS

Danish Institute Against Torture

European Bahraini Organisation for Human Rights (EBOHR)

European Center for Democracy and Human Rights (ECDHR)

FIDH, within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human 
Rights Defenders

Frontline Defenders

Gulf Center for Human Rights (GCHR)

Human Rights First

Human Rights Sentinel

IFEX

Index on Censorship

International Partnership for Human Rights (IPHR)

Justice for Human Rights (JHRO)

No Peace Without Justice

Physicians for Human Rights (PHR)

Project on Middle East Democracy (POMED)

REPORTERS SANS FRONTIÈRES (RSF)

Salam for Democracy and Human Rights

World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the 
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders

 

 

For Background Information on Nabeel Rajab, please visit 
this page, and for any further developments on his case please visit 
this page as it is regularly updated with the latest information. 