Malaysia:  Secret detention of Mr. Abdul Haris Bin Syuhadi_Fear for his safety
June 14, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Malaysia / 2011 / JuneMalaysia: Secret detention of Mr. Abdul Haris Bin Syuhadi_Fear for his safety​Case MYS 140611Arbitrary arrest and detention/ Secret detention/ Fear
for the safety and personnel integrity
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in
the following situation in Malaysia.
Brief description of the situation
The
International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by SUARAM, a member of OMCT
SOS-Torture Network, about the arbitrary arrest and detention of Mr. Abdul Haris
Bin Syuhadi, 63 years old, who resides and works as a petty trader
at Kampung Batu Belah, in Klang, by police officers, in events occurred in Klang. OMCT is gravely
concern about his safety as he has been arrested and since then secretly detained
under the Internal Security Act (ISA).
According
to the information received, on 5 June 2011, at about 8 pm, Mr.Abdul Haris Bin Syuhadi was arrested at his house by
police officers for alleged terrorism activities, under Section 73 (1) of the ISA[1].
To date, the whereabouts of Mr. Abdul Haris Bin
Syuhadi remain unknown and he has reportedly not been charged with any offence.
The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely
concerned about the safety of Mr. Abdul Haris Bin Syuhadi and recalls to the
authorities of Malaysia that they are legally bound to effectively
ensure the physical and psychological integrity of all persons deprived of
liberty in accordance with international human rights law. 
OMCT urges the competent authorities to immediately
disclose the whereabouts of Mr. Abdul Haris Bin Syuhadi and release him in the absence of valid legal charges and judicial process
consistent with international legal standards, or if
such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and
guarantee his procedural rights at all times. 
OMCT has on several occasions expressed gravest concerns over existing
emergency and anti-subversion laws in Malaysia which provide for indefinite
detention without trial in clear violation of
internationally recognised human rights standards relating to fair trials,
namely the Dangerous Drugs Act 1985 (DDA), the Emergency Ordinance 1969 (EO)
and the ISA[2]. Under
the ISA, individuals are deprived of many of their fundamental human rights,
such as their right to a fair and public trial, the right to be presumed innocent
until proven guilty according to law, and their right not to be subjected to
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. OMCT recalls
that the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention has urged the Government of
Malaysia, following his mission to the country, to take steps to repeal the ISA[3].

Action requested
Please write to the
authorities in Malaysia urging them to:
i.                    
Immediately locate and
disclose the whereabouts ofMr.Abdul Haris Bin Syuhadi;
ii.                  
Guarantee, in all
circumstances, his physical and psychological integrity;
iii.                 
Grant Mr. Abdul Haris Bin
Syuhadi unconditional access to a lawyer of his choice and
his family, as well as guarantee that he is promptly examined by independent
doctors and receives adequate and free medical care, in accordance, inter alia,
with the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners;
iv.                
Order his immediate release
in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent with international
law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring him promptly before an
impartial, independent and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural
rights at all times;
v.                  
Carry out a prompt,
effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the arrest
and detention of Mr.Abdul Haris Bin
Syuhadi, the result of which must be made public, in order
to bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial
tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by
law;
vi.                
Ensure the respect of human
rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with
national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
Ø      Prime Minister of Malaysia Mr. Dato' Sri Mohd Najib bin Tun Abdul Razak, Prime
Minister’s Office Malaysia, Perdana Putra Building, Federal Government
Administrative Centre, 62502 PUTRAJAYA, Selangor, Malaysia, Fax: + 60 3 8888
3444, Email: ppm@pmo.gov.my 
Ø      Malaysian Home
Affairs Minister Hishammuddin Hussein, Ministry of Home Affairs,Blok D1 & D2, Kompleks D, Pusat Pentadbiran, Kerajaan Persekutuan, 62546 Putrajaya, Fax:
03-88891613/03-88891610, Email:  hishammuddin@moha.gov.my
Ø     
Director, Batu Gajah Detention camp, Pusat Pemulihan
Akhlak, Jalan Brewster, 31000 Batu Gajah, Perak,
No. Fax : 05-3661519
Ø     
Permanent Mission of Malaysia to the United Nations in Geneva,
ICC-1er/ H, Pré-Bois 20, P.O. 1834, CH-1215, Geneva 15, Switzerland, Email :
mwgeneva@ties.itu.int, Fax: +4122 710 75 01
Please also write to the embassies of Malaysia in your respective country.
Geneva, 14 June 2011.
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.



[1] Section Power
to detain suspected persons. 


[2] See for example OMCT joint press release on 1 August 2010,
www.omct.org 


[3] See the Report of the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, 8 February 2011, A/HRC/16/47/Add.2. 