Joint Open Letter: The silencing of Egypt’s civil society – the EU must uphold its policy commitments
December 12, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2016 / DecemberJoint Open Letter: The silencing of Egypt’s civil society – the EU must uphold its policy commitmentsJoint OL Egypt 12.12.163 pages / 234 KB

Mr. Donald Tusk, President of the
European Council
EU Member State Ministers of Foreign
Affairs
Ms. Federica Mogherini, High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
and Vice-President of the European Commission
12 December 2016
Subject: The silencing
of Egypt’s civil society – the EU must uphold its policy commitments
We,
the 16 undersigned civil society organisations, urge you to take immediate measures to
address Egypt's escalating repression and silencing of civil society
organizations, including prominent Egyptian human rights defenders (HRDs).  In particular, your presence in
Cairo for the 20 December EU-Arab League ministerial-level dialogue provides a
key opportunity to raise these concerns at a high level with Egypt.
The new law on
civic associations (NGOs), drafted without consultation of independent civil
society, adopted
by Egypt's Parliament and referred to the Presidency on 29 November 2016 for
ratification. This
law thoroughly violates the constitutionally guaranteed
right to freedom of association and Egypt’s many international legal commitments to uphold
it.[i] UNSR Mr. Maina Kiai warned that the bill “aims
to destroy Egypt’s foundation for peaceful, civic engagement at its very roots.
If it becomes law, it would devastate civil society not only in the short term,
but possibly for generations to come.”[ii] It
would effectively end Egypt's independent human rights movement and cripple
civil society in the country overall, by putting all NGOs firmly under control
of the government and security establishment, under threat of heavy penalties.[iii]
This
coincides with the imposition of unconstitutional travel bans on five HRDs in November 2016, including WHRDs Ms. Azza Soliman,
founder of the Center for Egyptian Women’s Legal Aid (CEWLA) and Dr. Aida Seif
al-Dawla, founder of Al-Nadim Center for Rehabilitation of Victims of Violence.
Ms Soliman’s personal bank account and that of her law firm, Lawyers for
Justice and Peace, have been frozen. Ms Soliman was arrested from her
home on December 7 and taken for interrogation in the ongoing investigation
into the foreign funding of local NGOs, known as Case no. 173/2011; this was
the first arrest warrant executed against an NGO leader in Egypt. At the
Dec. 12 hearing on her asset freeze, lawyers discovered the Court is also
considering asset freezes against Nazra for Feminist Studies, its director
Ms Mozn Hassan, as well as the Arab Penal Reform Association, its
director Mr Mohamed Zarea and a staff member—without notifying these
parties. In another unprecedented move, an Egyptian court sentenced Mr Yehia
Qallash, the head of the journalists’ union, and two of its board members, to
two years in prison in November 2016 for “harbouring wanted colleagues” and
“spreading false news.”[iv] Such
measures were rightly denounced by the EEAS[v]
and several European Member States as well as a raft of UN figures.[vi]
This
crackdown on civil society is more counter-productive than ever. As Egypt is
confronted by a growing socio-economic and financial crisis, its poorest
citizens will be in ever-greater need for support from many of the NGOs
targeted by the law—including those focused on development and poverty
alleviation which provide essential services to vulnerable citizens. In
addition, the silencing of the Egyptian human rights community will leave the victims
of unlawful detention, enforced disappearance or torture by the authorities,
without support. The
absence of a deterrent on the ground—HRDs able to document, report and denounce
violations—allows for the escalation of violations by security forces, which is counterproductive to
promoting stability in Egypt: injustices fuel grievances, and worsen the conditions
that sparked revolt in 2011. 
Further,
civil society offers one of very few arenas for Egyptian women to actively
participate in the public sphere. Closing this space will further marginalize
women and their crucial role in Egypt’s development. High-profile independent
women’s rights organisations, notably Nazra for Feminist Studies and CEWLA,
have been targeted in the crackdown. They provide essential services to
survivors of violence and marginalized women, and play a key role in holding
the government to account regarding implementation of the National Strategy for
the Elimination of Violence against Women in Egypt.  
In
the reopened Foreign Funding Case (no. 173/2011), at least 4 rights
organisations and 6 prominent NGO workers or directors have already been
subjected to asset freezes; at least 15 leading Egyptian human rights defenders
have been subjected to arbitrary, unconstitutional travel bans[vii]; and more than a dozen
NGO staff and directors have been summoned for interrogation. If the case
goes to trial, these defenders would face 25 years in prison under Penal Code
Article 78 if found guilty of acts harmful to "national interests"
or “general peace” or “the country’s independence and its unity".
The European Union has
rightly recognized the fundamental role of civil society for stabilisation of
the MENA region, and the building of resilient societies and political systems,
making it a key element of the EU Global Strategy and of the revised European
Neighbourhood Policy. Its financial support for Egypt, as well as that of
several Member States, require involvement of credible civil society partners.
Egypt’s crackdown
on civil society violates the foundation of EU-Egypt cooperation (Article 2 of
the Association Agreement). This policy must change to allow for bilateral
cooperation to exist, to function, and to succeed, as asserted by the European
Parliament in its March 2016 urgency resolution.[viii] 
At
this crucial moment when President Abdelfattah al-Sisi is expected to ratify
the NGO law, the EU and Member States must send a clear message to Egypt to
cease these repressive practices. The conclusion of the EU-Egypt Partnership Priorities must depend
on Egypt accepting a real commitment in the text to working with civil society in
conformity with international human rights law and the Constitution, and
providing it the required space to operate.
We further urge you to
prioritise the overall human rights situation and rule of law in Egypt, within
the criteria used to decide bilateral cooperation. We recommend the
determination of clear benchmarks to assess this:
1.     The closing of the
Foreign Funding Case (no. 173/2011) against civil society organizations and the
holding of a sincere
and open dialogue in Egypt with all stakeholders—including established and
independent human rights groups—about the status and role of civil society. 
2.     Any new legislation to
replace the current Civic Associations Law (no. 84/2002) should be drafted in
full respect of Egypt's constitutional framework and its international legal
commitments to uphold the right to freedom of association; these norms require
abandoning the new NGO law, currently before the President for ratification.
3.     Concrete steps must be
taken to reopen the public sphere in Egypt, in particular by amending
legislation such as the 2013 Protest Law and the 1914 Assembly Law in
accordance with constitutionally-guaranteed rights to freedoms of expression
and peaceful assembly, and with
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; and by the unconditional release of all individuals detained
or sentenced for exercising their right to these freedoms, including human
rights defenders, democracy activists and media professionals.
Sincerely,


Arci Associazione
Asociación Pro Derechos
Humanos de España
Cairo Institute for Human
Rights Studies (CIHRS)
Christian Solidarity
Worldwide (CSW)
CNCD 11.11.11
EuroMed Rights
Front Line Defenders
Greek Helsinki Monitor
Human Rights Watch 
Kvinna till Kvinna
International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH), in the framework of the Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders
Minority Rights Group –
Greece
Reporters Without Borders
(RSF)
Reprieve
Saferworld
World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT), in the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders



[i] Egypt pledged to uphold the right to freedom of association by ratifying the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (ICCPR) and African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights
(ACHPR). It formally accepted recommendations to amend legislation and practice
so as to ensure respect of this right, following its Universal Permanent Review
(UPR) at the UNHRC in 2015. Egypt also made broad human rights commitments in
signing the Association Agreement with the EU (see article 2) which came into
force in 2004.


[ii] See statement by UN Special Rapporteur on the rights
to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association Mr. Maina Kiai, with the
support of UN Special rapporteurs on the promotion and protection of the right
to freedom of opinion and expression, and on the situation of human rights
defenders, Mr. David Kaye and Mr. Michel Forst, urging Egypt not to enact this
law. (http://freeassembly.net/news/egypt-ngo-bill-november/)


[iii] Some of the worst aspects of the law were detailed
here http://www.ifex.org/egypt/2016/11/23/egypt_draft_law_nov_2016/ by 60 national and international human rights NGOs
from across the world who urged President Al-Sisi not to ratify it. 


[iv] Reporters Without Borders and the Committee to Protect
Journalists rank Egypt as one of the biggest jailers of media workers
worldwide. Freelance photojournalist Mahmoud “Shawkan” Abu Zeid, arrested for
his work covering the extremely deadly 2013 Rabaa al-Adawiya sit-in dispersal,
has remained over three years in pre-trial detention and is part of a mass
trial.


[v] Most recently in Sept. 2016: https://eeas.europa.eu/node/9989_en 


[vi] In 2016, such measures were denounced by the Foreign
Ministries of Germany, the UK, France, Holland… the US Department of State, as
well as several UN Special Rapporteurs, the UN High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the UN Secretary-General.


[vii] See legal
action initiated by the Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies - CIHRS and
the Association for the Freedom of Thought and Expression – AFTE (http://www.cihrs.org/?p=19352&lang=en) following a joint report on the
unlawful use of travel bans against almost 80 HRDs, intellectuals, journalists,
opposition figures since 2014 (http://www.cihrs.org/?p=19269&lang=en) 


[viii] http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=-%2f%2fEP%2f%2fTEXT%2bTA%2bP8-TA-2016-0084%2b0%2bDOC%2bXML%2bV0%2f%2fEN&language=EN 