Uzbekistan:  Arbitrary arrest, ill-treatment and ongoing judicial harassment against Mr. Agzam Turgunov
September  6, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Uzbekistan / 2018 / SeptemberUzbekistan: Arbitrary arrest, ill-treatment and ongoing judicial harassment against Mr. Agzam Turgunov

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
UZB 001 / 0918 / OBS 111
Arbitrary arrest/
Ill-treatment/
Judicial
harassment
Uzbekistan
September 6, 2018

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests
your intervention in the following situation in Uzbekistan.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the arbitrary arrest,
ill-treatment and ongoing judicial harassment against Mr. Agzam Turgunov,
Chairman of the human rights organisation “Mazlum” (“Oppressed”, in English).
Mr. Agzam Turgunov has been actively advocating for the political and religious
rights of convicted prisoners. He has long worked on problems of education and
torture in prisons, as well as monitored judicial proceedings.  
 
According
to the information received, on August 29, 2018, Mr. Agzam Turgunov was
arrested while recording with his phone a violent incident opposing members of
the security forces and individuals gathered in front of the Supreme Court of
Uzbekistan for a reception. Three men in civilian clothes approached him,
refused to identify themselves, grabbed Mr. Turgunov roughly and forced him to
get into a car. Once in the car, a police officer named Rustam Muradov grabbed
Mr. Agzam Turgunov’s head and began to strangle him while trying to take his
phone and delete the records. At the same time, he reproached Mr. Turgunov his
“cooperation with the Americans and the West”. The same day, Mr. Turgunov was
taken to the Shaikhantaur district Court for criminal cases where the judge set
a trial date on the following day, before releasing him. 
 
On
August 30, 2018, Mr. Turgunov was convicted of “failure to carry out the lawful
demands of a police officer or other persons carrying out duties to guard
public order” under Article 194 of the administrative code of Uzbekistan. He
was imposed a fine of one minimum wage (around 20 EUR). The policemen did not
appear in court during the trial. Mr. Turgunov intends to appeal this decision.

 
On
the same day, Mr. Turgunov was told by an agent of the Department of Visas and
Passports that his request for permission to leave Uzbekistan to travel abroad
had been denied. As other human rights defenders also under travel ban, he will
not be able to attend the Human Dimension Implementation Meeting of the OSCE in
Warsaw mid-September 2018. 
 
The
Observatory notes that this is not the first attack Mr. Agzam Turgunov has
faced in retaliation to his legitimate human rights activities since he only
was released from prison on October 7, 2017, after serving nine years of prison
on unfounded extortion charges.
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the arbitrary arrest and the ongoing judicial
harassment against Mr. Agzam Turgunov as they are only aimed at punishing him
for his legitimate human rights activities. The Observatory calls on the Uzbek
authorities to end any harassment, including at the judicial level, and drop
all charges against him as well as against all the human rights defenders
currently arbitrarily detained in the country as well as to lift all travel
bans so that human rights defenders can freely carry out their right to defend
human rights including at the international level. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities of Uzbekistan asking them to:
 
i. Guarantee in
all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Agzam
Turgunov and all human rights defenders in the Uzbekistan;
 
ii. Put an end
to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Mr. Agzam
Turgunov and all human rights defenders arbitrarily detained in the country;
 
iii. Carry out
an independent investigation on the above-mentioned allegations of
ill-treatement and bring the authors to justice; 
 
iv. Lift all
travel bans against human rights defenders so as to ensure their legitimate
right to defend human rights including at the international level;
 
v. Comply with all the provisions of the
United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN General
Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular its Articles 1, 6(a), 9, and 12.2;
 
vi. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Uzbekistan.
 
Addresses:

· Mr. Shavkat Mirziyoyev,
President of Uzbekistan. Fax: +998 71 133 1395325. E-mail:
presidents_office@press-service.uz
· Mr. Azizov Abdusalom Abdumavlanovich, Minister of Internal Affairs. Fax:
+ 998 71 233 89 34. Email: mvd@mvd.uz, info@mvd.uz
· Mr. Abdulaev Ikhtior Bakhtiorovich, General
Prosecutor of the Republic of Uzbekistan. Fax: +998 71 133 39 17. E-mail: prokuratura@lawyer.com
· Mr. Abdulaziz Komilov, Minister of Foreign Affairs.
Fax: + 998 71 139 15 17. E-mail: rnews@mfa.uz
· Ms. Ulugbek Mukhammadiev, Parliamentary Commissioner for Human Rights. Fax:
+998 71 139 85 55. E-mail: office@ombudsman.gov.uz
· Mr. Ulugbek Lapasov, Permanent Mission of Uzbekistan
to the United Nations in Geneva. Fax: +41 22 799 43 02. Email: uzbekistan@bluewin.ch
· H.E. Mr. Vladimir Norov, Ambassador, Embassy of Uzbekistan
to Belgium. Fax. +32 2 672 39 46 Email: embassy@uzbekistan.be
 
 
Please also
write to the diplomatic representations of Uzbekistan in your respective
countries.
 
***
 
Paris-Geneva, September 6, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to
prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. FIDH
and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the
European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil
society.  
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·    
E-mail:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·    
Tel
and fax FIDH +33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·    
Tel
and fax OMCT +41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / +41 22 809 49 29 