Bahrain:  Human rights defender Nabeel Rajab to remain in detention, appeal trial to resume on September 27
September 12, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2012 / SeptemberBahrain: Human rights defender Nabeel Rajab to remain in detention, appeal trial to resume on September 27


PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

 
BAHRAIN: Human Rights Defender Nabeel Rajab to remain
in detention, appeal trial to resume on September 27
 
Trial Observation Mission
 
Paris-Geneva, September 12, 2012 – The Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), sent
a trial observation mission to Bahrain to observe the opening of the appeal in
cases against Mr. Nabeel Rajab. It remains very concerned at the continuation
of the policy of silencing and criminalising legitimate human rights
activities.
‪
On
September 10, 2012, a Bahrain appeals court rejected the requests from
the lawyers of Mr. Nabeel Rajab, President of the Bahrain Centre for
Human Rights (BCHR), Director of the Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR) and
FIDH Deputy Secretary General, to release him on bail and scheduled the
next hearing for September 27. During this hearing, Mr. Rajab's lawyers also
submitted a request to merge the charges of the three cases and another request
to add to the case file a report stating that Mr. Rajab had been beaten by the
police. On August 16, 2012, the Lower Criminal Court had sentenced Nabeel
Rajab, to three years’ imprisonment for three cases related to his
participation in peaceful gatherings in favour of fundamental freedoms and
democracy. He has been detained since July 9, 2012[1].

 
‪The appeal proceedings are expected to resume on
September 27 with the examination of evidence and witness testimonies related
to the three criminal cases to be brought by both the Prosecutor and the
Defense. Mr. Rajab's lawyers challenged the fairness of the
trial on the basis that defense evidence was not heard before the convictions
were entered and the sentence issued. Meanwhile Mr. Rajab's lawyers intend to
file a petition for review, by the implementation judge, of the decision not to
order provisional release. 
‪
On
September 10, human rights blogger Zainab Al-Khawaja
also appeared in court. Ms. Al-Khawaja is currently in detention and 13 cases
have been filed against her over the past months for her participation in those
peaceful protests.
 
‪The trial observation mission was conducted by
FIDH Vice President Katherine Gallagher, Senior Attorney at the Center for
Constitutional Rights (CCR, USA). She had unimpeded access to the court room
and could meet privately with Mr. Rajab at Jaw prison. She also met the
Minister of Justice, the Human Rights Under Secretary, Nabeel Rajab's family
and lawyers, human rights defenders and diplomats.
 
While
welcoming the cooperation of the Bahraini authorities during the mission,the
Observatory recalls that the exercise of the rights to freedom of expression
and of peaceful assembly, including by calling for reforms and denouncing human
rights violations, is not a crime. Those rights constitute legitimate freedoms
necessary in a democratic state. For this reason, it firmly condemns the
continuing campaign to criminalise dissent and human rights defenders. The continuing
repression of free speech in Bahrain violates Bahrain international legal
obligations and urges the Bahraini authorities to comply with the rights to
peaceful assembly and expression, and to immediately release those arbitrarily
detained for exercising their legitimate freedoms.
 
For more information,
please contact:
·       FIDH: Arthur Manet: +
33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
·       OMCT: Anne-Laurence Lacroix: +41 (0) 22 809 49 31
 



[1]            Nabeel
Rajab was initially arrested in relation to another criminal case for which he
was acquitted on August 23, 2012. See the Observatory's Urgent Appeals BHR 001
/ 0512 / OBS 048.2, July 10, 2012 and BHR 001 / 0812 / OBS 048.6. 