Joint Letter to Ms. Mogherini and Mr. Tusk regarding extension of Turkey’s state of emergency in a context of grave human rights violations
April 20, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Urgent Interventions / European Union (EU) / 2017 / AprilJoint Letter to Ms. Mogherini and Mr. Tusk regarding extension of Turkey’s state of emergency in a context of grave human rights violations​













Ms Federica Mogherini, High
Representative of the Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy and Vice-President of the European Commission
Mr Donald Tusk, President of the European
Council
cc: Ministers of Foreign Affairs of
the European Union and EU ambassadors to Turkey
 
20 April 2016
 
Object: Extension of Turkey’s
state of emergency in a context of grave human rights violations
 
Dear HR/VP Federica Mogherini,
Dear President Donald Tusk,
 
EuroMed Rights, European Federation
of Journalists, Front Line Defenders, Index on Censorship and World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) are deeply concerned by the Turkish
government’s decision to extend the state of emergency in Turkey by a further
three months. The decision has been approved by the Turkish parliament and published
in the Official Gazette.  
 
The far-reaching discretionary
powers exercised by the Turkish authorities during the nine months of the state
of emergency have deeply undermined the rule of law and human rights
safeguards. 
 
We support the position of the
Venice commission of December 2016, which stated that “the Government
interpreted its extraordinary powers too extensively and took measures that
went beyond what is permitted by the Turkish Constitution and by international
law.” We also note the
preliminary findings and conclusions of the OSCE-ODIHR International
Observation Mission stating that "under the state of emergency (…),
fundamental freedoms essential to a genuinely democratic process were curtailed
(…). One side’s dominance in the coverage and restrictions on the media reduced
voters’ access to a plurality of views".
 
In view of the dangers arising from
the extension of the state of emergency and the worrying human rights situation
in Turkey (see appendix), the signatory organisations call on you to: 
 
1.     Urge the
Government of Turkey to reverse its decision to renew the state of emergency
and to revoke measures incompatible with Turkey’s human rights obligations;
2.     Urge the Turkish authorities to release
from custody without delay, unconditionally drop politically-motivated
charges and proceedings, and quash sentences against the hundreds of journalists, elected members
of parliament and mayors of South Eastern municipalities, human rights defenders,
trade unionists, and intellectuals unjustly jailed or facing judicial
harassment for their legitimate human rights work, writing, non-violent political
association or convictions;
3.     Monitor
closely the safety of human rights defenders and encourage the EU Delegation and the EU
Member State Embassies in Turkey to proactively implement the EU Guidelines on
Human Rights Defenders. In particular, the EU Missions should as often as possible
visit political prisoners in jail and attend the trials of human rights
defenders, including journalists and trade unionists. The EU Delegation and the
EU Member State Embassies in Turkey should also press Turkish authorities to
ensure that human rights organisations and professional bodies of relevant experts
such as medical chambers, bar associations and lawyers associations are also
given access to all places of detention and court rooms.
 
We look forward to hearing from you
about steps that the European Union will take to implement these recommendations,
in line with the EU Guidelines on Human Rights Defenders and the EU’s Human
Rights Action Plan adopted by the Council on 20 July 2015.
 
Yours sincerely,
 
Michel Tubiana – EuroMed Rights
President
Mogens Blicher Bjerregård – European
Federation of Journalists President
Andrew Anderson – Front Line
Defenders Executive Director
Hugh Williamson – Human Rights Watch
Executive Director, Europe & Central Asia
Jodie Ginsberg – Index on Censorship
Chief Executive
Gerald Staberock – World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT) Secretary General 