Lebanon:  Lebanon: Harassment / risk of arrest
May  5, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Lebanon / 2000 / MayLebanon: Lebanon: Harassment / risk of arrestURGENT APPEAL - OBSERVATORY  LBN 001/0005/OBS 033     Harassment / risk of arrest Lebanon 5 May 2000  The Observatory for the protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the FIDH and the OMCT, requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Lebanon.  Brief description of the facts :  The Observatory was informed that Muhamad Mugraby, lawyer and member of the Bar of Beirut and eminent human rights defender, known for his work on corruption within the Lebanese judiciary, is currently the subject of proceedings initiated by the Prosecutor of Beirut for “defamation against the judiciary power” and is threatened with imprisonment.   The Bar was taken hold of by the Prosecutor so that it would give the authorisation to initiate these proceedings against Mr. Mugraby, in accordance with the procedure under Article 79 of the Legal Professions Code.  According to the information received, these proceedings follow a conference given by Mr. Mugraby on 19th April 2000 on the causes of corruption at the heart of the Lebanese legal system.  During this conference, Mr. Mugraby named a number of judges, thereby putting their integrity in question.   The Observatory recalls that Mr. Mugraby has previously been the object of a number of proceedings as a result of his activities as a human rights defender.  Two actions designed to deprive him of his immunity as a lawyer, are currently under examination in front of the Court of Appeal of Beirut, a third action having been abandoned.  He is notably being pursued for defamation, after the Lebanese authorities intercepted a fax destined to Amnesty International in which he denounced the persecution and torture perpetrated against a number of persons.   The Observatory believes that the different procedures currently taking place in the court against Mr. Mugraby are designed to prevent him for pursuing his work as a human rights defender.  This in itself constitutes a recognised violation under the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and the dispositions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political rights ratified by Lebanon, as well as the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations.   Actions requested :   Please write to the Lebanese authorities urging them:  i 	put an end to all forms of harassment, including judicial proceedings, against Mr. Mugraby.  ii	take all appropriate measures to guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Mugraby  iii.	ensure the implementation of the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9 1998 (Declaration concerning the rights and responsibilities of individuals, groups and institutions to promote and protect universally recognised human rights and fundamental liberties) in particular its Article 1 which  provides that “Every person has the right, individually or collectively, to promote the protection and fulfilment of human rights and fundamental liberties at the national and international level” as well as article 12.2, which notes that “The State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”.  iv.	more generally, guarantee the effective respect of fundamental human rights and freedoms in accordance with the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and international and regional Pacts and Covenants ratified by Lebanon.  Addresses :  S.E. Emile LAHOUD, Président de la République du Liban, Beirut. Fax (+ 96 5) 451 217 E-mail : opendoo@presidency.gov.lb  S.E. Monsieru Sélim EL-HOSS, Premier Ministre, Fax (+ 961 1) 354 929  E-mail : marasem@pcm.gob.lb   S.E. Joseph Shaoul, Ministre de la Justice, Ministère de la Justice, Palais de justice, Beirut, Liban. Fax : (+ 961 1) 422 957  S.E. Monsieur Michel Murr, Ministre de l'Intérieur, Beirut, Liban. Fax : (+ 961 1) 869 813   Paris-Geneva, 5th May 2000  Kindly inform the Observatory of any action undertaken quoting the code number of this appeal in your reply.  The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need. 1998 Human Rights Prize of The French Republic.  To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: Fax :  +33 (0) 1 55 80 83 92   Tel:  FIDH +33 (0) 1 48 55 20 11       OMCT: +41 (0) 22 809 49 39 E.Mail : observatoire@iprolink.ch 