Iran:  Harassment and arbitrary detention of human rights defenders continue
March 10, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2014 / MarchIran: Harassment and arbitrary detention of human rights defenders continue

Paris-Geneva, March 10, 2014. The Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, an FIDH-OMCT joint programme,
deplores the continued harassment and arbitrary detention of human rights
defenders in Iran.
 
On March 2, 2014, Branch 15
of the Islamic Revolutionary Court sentenced Ms. Maryam Shafi'pour to seven years' imprisonment
for her activities as well as a two-year ban on media and online activities as a students' rights defender, after finding her guilty of “spreading propaganda against the
system” and “assembly and collusion against national security”. Ms. Shafi'pour has been
detained since July 27, 2013 in Tehran's Evin Prison, and spent two months in
solitary confinement without access to a lawyer. She was also reportedly beaten
up and tortured during her pre-trial detention. To substantiate the charges
against her, the authorities had accused her of “contacts with families of
political prisoners and helping them”, “membership of a student organisation
campaigning against discrimination in education”, “contacts with foreign
media”, and “contacts with leaders of sedition during their house arrest”.
 
In addition, on March 2,
2014, two Dervishes' rights defenders and administrators of the Majzooban Noor website, namely Mr. Farshid Yadollahi, a
lawyer and member of the Human Rights Commission of the Bar Association, and
Mr. Reza
Entessari, a photojournalist, were unexpectedly transferred together
with Mr. Saeed
Madani, an Iranian sociologist and human rights activist, to
Rajaishahr prison, close to the city of Karaj, 60 km west from the capital
Tehran. 
 
Mr.
Saeed Madani was sentenced in June 2013 by Branch 26 of Islamic Revolution
Court to six years' imprisonment (four years of it imprisonment in exile) and
10 years life in exile, and his sentence was upheld on appeal in February.
Messrs. Farshid Yadollahi and Reza Entessari were sentenced by Branch 15 of the
Islamic Revolution Court in July 2013 to seven years and six months and eight
years and six months in prison respectively, for “establishment of the
Majzooban Noor illegal group with intent to undermine the national security,
spreading propaganda against the system, insulting the Leader, and complicity
in disrupting the public order”. The Observatory considers that this transfer
to Rajai Shahr is a punishment both for these defenders and their families and
tantamount to imprisonment in exile, which does not exist in the Iranian law.
Mr. Yadollahi's family lives in the Southern city of Shiraz, the relatives of
Mr. Entessari in Kish Island, Persian Gulf, and Mr. Madani's relatives in
Tehran.
 
In
addition, Messrs. Shahrokh Zamani and
Rassoul Bodaghi, two imprisoned trade unionists, have been recently
facing heavy-handed harassment in Rajaishahr prison. They are respectively
members of the provisional board for reopening the Building Painting Workers
Syndicate, and Teachers Association of Iran. Mr. Shahrokh Zamani was taken to
the Intelligence Office based in the prison on March 5, and accused of issuing
and signing critical statements. During the interrogation, Mr. Shahrokh Zamani
protested and complained that signals transmitted by mobile-phone jamming units
installed in the prison in October 2013 had caused psychological and physical
sicknesses to a number of prisoners. Other prisoners or their families have
also made similar complaints in recent months. On February 15, the prison
authorities had sent Messrs. Shahrokh Zamani and Rassoul Bodaghi to solitary
confinement in response to their protest against the closure of the library of
the prison’s Ward 12, but returned them to the Ward after they and their
cellmates went on hunger strike. Subsequently, on February 22, the two were
summoned to Karaj Prosecutor’s Office, where they were charged with rioting and
disrupting order in prison, as a result of which they may face new judicial
proceedings and sentencing.
 
The Observatory was also informed that Mr. Mohammad
Jarrahi, another member of the provisional board for reopening the Building
Painting Workers Syndicate, who is also imprisoned in Rajaishahr prison,
suffers from cancer. His life in danger as he is denied the necessary medical
care and treatment.
 
Finally, the Observatory was informed that the
Province's Appeals Court upheld the sentences of Messrs. Khosro Kordpour
and Massoud Kordpour, brothers and respectively editor of and
correspondent with the Mukrian News Agency, reporting mainly about the
conditions of civil rights activists, political prisoners and human rights
violations in particular in the Iranian Kurdish-inhabited regions and cities.
On November 9, 2013, the Islamic Revolution Court of Mahabad had sentenced Mr.
Khosro Kordpour to five years in prison to be served in internal exile in
Tabriz prison as well as two years of internal exile in the city of Kerman for
“assembly and collusion”, and to one additional year in prison for “spreading
propaganda”. Mr. Massoud Kordpour had been sentenced to three years in prison
for “assembly and collusion” and to six months' imprisonment for “spreading
propaganda”. In an opinion adopted during its 68th session on November 20,
2013, the United Nations (UN) Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD) found
their detention to be arbitrary and therefore requested their release.
 
The Observatory urges the Iranian authorities to
immediately and unconditionally release these human rights defenders as well as
all human rights defenders presently detained in the country, to put an end to
ill-treatment of detainees and to the unlawful imposition of exile
imprisonment, and to comply with the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and international human
rights instruments ratified by Iran.

For
further information, please contact:
FIDH: Audrey Couprie / Arthur
     Manet : + 33 1 43 55 25 18OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 39 