Honduras:  Murder of the prominent human rights defender Berta Cáceres
March  4, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Honduras / 2016 / MarchHonduras: Murder of the prominent human rights defender Berta CáceresPR Berta EN2 pages / 136 KB
Paris-Geneva, March 3, 2016 – The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights, a joint FIDH-OMCT program, strongly condemns the murder of Ms Berta Cáceres, Leader of the Lenca indigenous community. This murder demonstrates the
reluctance of the Honduran authorities to ensure the protection of human rights
defenders.
Ms.
Bertha Isabel Cáceres Flores, member of the Lenca indigenous community,
Cofounder and Coordinator of the Civic Council of Popular and Indigenous
Organisations of Honduras (COPINH), was killed at about 1am on March 3, 2016 (and
not 11:45 pm on the March 3rd, as stated previously) in the city of La Esperanza, a
department of the south-west of Intibucá, her hometown, by unidentified
individuals. According to local sources, the perpetrators waited for her to
fall sleep before forcing the door to her house and killed her.
Human rights
defender Gustavo Castro Soto, memberof the organisation Other
Worlds of Chiapas, and of the Mexican Movement of People Affected by Dams and
in Defense of Rivers (MAPDER) in Mexico, as well as of the Mesoamerican
Movement against the M4 Mining Model and the Latin American Network against
Dams and for Rivers, their Communities and Water (REDLAR), who was present in
the country as part of an exchange of experiences with COPINH on energy
alternatives according to indigenous vision, was also injured during the
attack.
Ms. Berta Cáceres fought for the rights of the Lenca indigenous people,
notably the right to recover their land in Rio Blanco (the White River) in
Intibucá, and against the construction of the hydroelectric dam Agua Zarca by
the Energy Development Company S.A. (DESA), on Lenca territory. The Lenca people
have long been struggling for the defense of their ancestral lands and for the
protection of the White River. As a result, the Lenca population has been
persecuted some were forced to abandon their territories. Some members of the
community were injured, and in 2014, four Lencas were killed. These attacks
were perpetrated in total impunity. 
On
several occasions, Ms. Cáceres denounced the expropriation of the Lenca from
their ancestral territories and the lack of protection in terms of health and
agricultural . Additionally, she opposed the establishment of US military bases
in Lenca territory. Last week, she participated in a press conference and
denounced the murder of four leaders of her community and the threats made
against other Lencas. Recently, Ms. Cáceres was awarded the Goldman Prize 2015
for Latin America because of her continuous commitment and work in favor of
human rights.
The Observatory notes with concern and
strongly denounces the increasing attacks and the criminalisation of individuals
and communities who engage in the defense of human rights, including land
rights, in the context of investment projects (hydroelectric, mining,
mono-culture, etc.) in Honduras, as a form of intimidation to their work. This
trend is addressed in the Observatory Report entitled “Criminalisation
of human rights defenders in the context of industrial projects: a regional
phenomenon in Latin America”, in which the harassment faced by Ms. Cáceres was
analysed.
The Observatory also
denounces the Honduran authorities' lack of will to implement and enforce the
protection measures for human rights defenders. Ms. Berta Cáceres was benefiting from
precautionary measures granted by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
since June 29, 2009.
In this context, the Observatory urges the authorities of Honduras to
respect the work of human rights defenders and to take seriously and
responsibly their obligation to ensure that urgent protection measures are
effectively implemented and benefit from an adequate budget.
Finally, the Observatory urges the Honduran authorities to carry out an
immediate, thorough, impartial and international investigation into all attacks
against defenders, and that all those responsible are brought to justice.
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy to situations
of repression against human rights defenders.

For more information, please contact:

• FIDH: Arthur Manet/Audrey
Couprie: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
• OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui / Chiara
Cosentino: +32 2 218 37 19 