Sudan:  Allegations of torture and ill-treatment of student in Port Sudan
May 16, 2008
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2008 / MaySudan: Allegations of torture and ill-treatment of student in Port SudanCase SDN 160508 Alleged torture and ill-treatment/ Fear for safety  The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sudan. Brief description of the situation The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudan Organisation Against Torture (SOAT), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture network, about the alleged torture and ill-treatment suffered by Mr. Faries Abd Alhay Mohmed Ali, 25 years old student of al-Bahr al-Ahmar University and member of a student political body called the Democratic Front, in Port Sudan. According to the information received, on 11 May 2008 at 3pm, members of the National Security and Intelligence Service (NISS) detained Mr. Faries Abd Alhay Mohmed Ali from the gates of Port Sudan Hospital, in Red Sea State. Following clashes between students at the university, Mr. Faries Abd Alhay Mohmed Ali had been taking wounded individuals to the hospital for treatment. After his arrest, Mr. Faries Abd Alhay Mohmed Ali was taken to security premises and allegedly subjected to physical abuse in custody, including being kicked with boots and beaten with water pipes. Mr. Faries Abd Alhay Mohmed Ali was then reportedly forced to sign a written undertaking not to take part in any political activities at al-Bahr al-Ahmar University. Before releasing him at 3am on 12 May 2008, security agents allegedly told Mr. Faries Abd Alhay Mohmed Ali that, if he was detained again, it would be for much longer. Under the National Security Forces Act, members of the NISS have the power to arrest and detain individuals without charge for up to nine months. The same act also dictates that the director of the NISS must give his prior approval in order for any security agent to face civil or criminal proceedings. In practice, this ensures the impunity of security agents responsible for torture and other abuses in custody. According to the same information, an unknown number of students were arrested following the unrest at al-Bahr al-Ahmar University. Political violence on university campuses is a frequent occurrence in Sudan. The International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its grave concern about the allegations of torture and ill-treatment by security forces and urges the Sudanese authorities to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Faries Abd Alhay Mohmed Ali at all times. OMCT recalls that Sudan is a State party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), which prohibits cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. In line with their obligations under this treaty, it is incumbent on the Sudanese authorities to consider seriously any allegations of torture and ill-treatment, and to undertake a thorough investigation in this regard. Requested Action Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:   Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Faries Abd Alhay Mohmed Ali and the others detained following the clashes at al-Bahr al-Ahmar University;  Order a thorough and impartial investigation into these events, in particular into the allegations of torture and ill-treatment, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  Guarantee that adequate compensation is awarded to the victim;  Guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international humanitarian law and human rights standards, and in particular, expedite reforms to bring the Sudanese justice system and all legislation into line with the Interim National Constitution and international human rights standards, and to end the impunity of state officials.  Addresses  H.E. President Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir, Office of the President, People’s Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan H.E. Salva Kiir Mayardit, First Vice-President, People’s Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan, H.E. Ali Osman Mohamed Taha, Vice-President, People’s Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan Mr. Abdel Bassit Sabdarat, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan Mr. Deng Alor, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs/External Relations, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan Mr. Ibrahim Mohamed Hamed, Minister of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Interior, PO Box 873,Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: +249 183 779383 Dr Abdelmuneim Osman Mohamed Taha, Advisory Council for Human Rights, Rapporteur, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: +249 183 77 08 83 Permanent Mission of the Republic of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, Avenue Blanc 47, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Tel: +41 22 731 26 63, Fax: +41 22 731 26 56, Email: mission.sudan@bluewin.ch / mission.sudan@ties.itu.int The Embassy of Sudan in Brussels, Avenue F.D. Roosevelt 124, 1050 Brussels, Belgium. Tel.:0032 (2) 647 51 59 / 0032 (2) 647 94 94, Fax: 0032 (2) 648 34 99, Email: sudanbx@yahoo.com  Please also write to the embassies of Sudan in your respective country.  Geneva, 16 May 2008 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 