29th Session Human Rights Council: Statement for interactive dialogue with SR on Peaceful Assembly and Association
June 18, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Angola / 2015 / June29th Session Human Rights Council: Statement for interactive dialogue with SR on Peaceful Assembly and AssociationHRC 29 OBS Statement FoAA1 page / 103 KBHUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL
29th session – June 17, 2015
Item 3: Interactive dialogue with the SR on Peaceful
Assembly and Association
 
Oral statement delivered by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for
Human Rights (FIDH), within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders.
 
Mr. President, Mr. Special Rapporteur, 
 
Our organisations welcome the report
on the Rights to freedom of
peaceful assembly and of association in the context of natural resource
exploitation and call for States, business
enterprises and other actors to use its recommendations as a blueprint for
reforms.
 
The
Observatory recently published its Annual Report: "We are not afraid". Land Rights Defenders: attacked for
confronting unbridled development. It provides a global analysis on the particular
vulnerability of land rights defenders and
reflects on the work of the Observatory in the past few years. 
 
Mr. Special
Rapporteur, the Observatory notices the high degree of coincidences between the
two reports.
 
At the heart of the problem lies the issue of
the participation of individuals and communities affected by the development
policies and investment projects for which the full respect of the freedoms of
assembly and association are essential in order to prevent escalation of land
disputes and put an end to serious human rights violations. 
 
The Observatory calls for meaningful
consultations that ensure the direct participation of those affected by the
projects and for the recognition of land rights defenders as legitimate
spokespersons. Furthermore, it is necessary to strengthen the capacity and
independence of domestic judicial systems, and to strengthen international law
in order to trigger effectively the responsibility of business enterprises, in
order to combat impunity.
 
Mr. Special Rapporteur, finally, we would like to refer to the worrying
and growing trend of laws restricting freedom of association tabled or approved
across the world including in countries such as the Russian Federation,
Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, China, Cambodia, Angola,
Uganda, Kenya, Burundi, Tanzania, South Sudan, Sudan or Egypt just to mention
some examples that illustrate the global dimension of this problem. The
Observatory recalls the recommendations contained in its 2013 Annual Report
which addressed restrictions in the access to funding and exhorts you, Mr.
Special Rapporteur, to join forces with other mandate-holders at the UN but also
in the regional human rights systems to address this global threat.
 
We thank you Mr Special Rapporteur.The full report of the SR is available here:- in English:A_HRC_29_25_EN_Report_SR_FoAA- in French: A_HRC_29_25_FR_Report_SR_FoAA- in Spanish: A_HRC_29_25_ESP_Report_SR_FoAA 