16th session of the Human Rights Council: Interactive dialogue with the Special Rapporteur on human rights defenders: Joint oral statement
March 10, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2011 / March16th session of the Human Rights Council: Interactive dialogue with the Special Rapporteur on human rights defenders: Joint oral statement Oral intervention on HRDs_ Human Rights Council_16th session2 pages / 40 KB
Human Rights Council March 2011
Human Rights First, OMCT and
FIDH
Intervention Presented by Pamela
Kling Takiff
Thank you
Mr. President.
I am speaking on behalf of Human Rights First, OMCT and FIDH. 
HRF has worked for many
years to reverse the tide of hate crimes and religious and other forms of
discrimination by offering positive recommendations to governments to confront
hatred while respecting freedom of expression. In that regard, we welcome the
report of the Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief.
Although we recognize a global
problem of hostility, discrimination and violence targeting persons on account
of their religion or belief, we have opposed the concept of “defamation of
religions” as counterproductive to efforts to protect individuals from these
human rights abuses. 
The recent outbreak of
religiously motivated violence - including the assassinations of Governor
Taseer and Minister Bhatti in Pakistan
and the incidents of mob violence in Indonesia - serve as a tragic
reminder of the dangerous and sometimes deadly consequences of national
blasphemy laws. HRF has documented over 70 recent cases from 15 countries
demonstrating how blasphemy laws have also been used to stifle discussion and
dissent and settle private disputes.
HRF urges Council
Members to vote against any resolution which refers to “defamation"
or "denigration" of religions” and to focus instead on the
implementation of existing obligations to combat discrimination and violence. 
HRF, OMCT and FIDH wish to
thank the Special Rapporteur on Human Rights Defenders for her report on women
human rights defenders and defenders working on women's rights and gender
issues. We hope the mandate continues to have a gender specific approach in the
years to come. The brutal killing last January of David Kato, a Ugandan human
rights defender working on LGBTI issues, shocked the community of defenders. We
call for an immediate and transparent investigation into his killing and all
attacks against defenders working on women’s rights and gender issues.
We are alarmed by the increase
of violations committed by non-State actors against human rights defenders.
We are also concerned about
recent attacks on defenders in the Middle East and urge you to continue to
request country visits to Egypt
and Tunisia
during this crucial transitional phase.
 We see opportunities for
progress for defenders in some countries in the region, and call for an
immediate end to repressive legislation that undermines their work, an end to
arbitrary detention and torture, and meaningful progress on constitutional
reform to protect them.
We note that in Iran that women
human rights defenders active in the "One Million Signatures"
Campaign seeking to end discriminatory laws against women face constant
harassment, and some remain arbitrarily detained.
A member of Mothers for Peace,
Ms. Haleh Sahabi has also recently started to serve a two-year sentence. Others
have faced abusive judicial proceedings. New charges have also been brought
against the spokesperson of the Defenders of the Human Rights Centre (DHRC).
 We call upon the Special
Rapporteur to provide technical assistance, which includes a gender dimension,
to those countries which are in the process of drafting national protection
measures such as Mexico and Brazil. 
Thank
you 