Mexico:  Killing of Ms Regina Martínez Pérez and law on the protection of human rights defenders
May  4, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Mexico / 2012 / MayMexico: Killing of Ms Regina Martínez Pérez and law on the protection of human rights defendersInternational
Coalition calls for the National Mechanism for the protection of HRD and
Journalists in Mexico to be brought into
force immediately, in light of the recent death of journalist, Ms Regina
Martínez Pérez. 
4th May 2012 
The Women Human Rights Defenders
International Coalition (WHRD IC) urges the Mexican government to immediately
bring into full force the law for the protection of human rights defenders
(HRD) and Journalists. The national mechanism is designed to establish
obligations which ensure authorities act on requests for protection of HRDs and
journalists who are at risk of attack through the implementation of
preventative protection measures. 
On the 24th April the
Mexican Senate unanimously approved the bill for the protection of human rights
defenders (HRD) and Journalists, and held a minute’s silence for victims. On
the 30th April in the Chamber of Deputies, the draft law again received
unanimous support and a minute of silence was observed, this time it was for Ms
Regina Martínez Pérez, the latest victim. 
Ms Pérez was a
correspondent with the publication Proceso, and had recently reported on the
arrest of an allegedly high-ranking criminal leader, the arrests of nine police
officers charged over links to cartels, a local mayor who was arrested with
alleged cartel gunmen following a shootout with the Mexican Army, and other
controversial stories. According to information made available, on the 28th
April, Ms Pérez was found dead in her home with signs of physical assault, her
mobile phones and a computer was taken from the scene. 
The WHRD IC is especially
concerned that the killing of Ms Pérez is not an isolated incident; four
journalists were killed in 2011 in the State of Veracruz alone. Mrs. Margaret Sekaggya, as
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders, in her recent
2011 report mentions that journalists and media workers are targeted due to
their reporting of human rights violations. Furthermore, Mrs. Sekaggya focused
on Mexico when she highlighted the risks faced by
journalists like Ms Pérez; “Journalists and media workers have also been
attacked when their activities include investigations of abuses by powerful
non-State actors, such as organized crime (Italy, Mexico).” The killing of three more
photojournalists in Veracruz on 3 May confirms the grave threat
faced by those at risk. 
The WHRD IC urges the
Mexican authorities to fulfil their commitments under the UN Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders as well as obligations under the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, by bringing the
protective law into force as soon as possible. 
The WHRD IC calls for the
Mexican authorities to: 
Carry out an immediate and impartial
     investigation into the death of Ms Pérez and to ensure that perpetrators
     of this attack and others are brought to justice.  Ensure that effective measures are
     implemented and resources are made available to assist and protect those
     at risk, in coordination with civil society. Ensure that the new law is put into effect
     immediately and enables HRD and journalists to carry out their legitimate
     human rights activities without fear of harassment, intimidation and
     physical injury.Ensure that the specific needs of WHRDs
     are fully taken into account in the elaboration and implementation of the
     protection mechanism. 
The Women Human
Rights Defenders International Coalition (WHRD IC) is a resource and
advocacy network for the protection and support of women human rights defenders
worldwide. 
This statement has been
individually endorsed by the following organisations: 
Amnesty International (AI)
Association for Women’s
Rights in Development (AWID)
The Center for Women's
Global Leadership (CWGL) 
Front Line International
Foundation for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (Front Line)
Information Monitor
(Inform)
Peace Brigades
International (PBI)
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (a joint programme OMCT-FIDH)
Women’s Initiatives for
Gender Justice (WIGJ) 