Belarus:  Human rights defender Ales Bialiatski sentenced to 4.5 years of imprisonment, a sad day for the defence of human rights in the world
November 24, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Belarus / 2011 / NovemberBelarus: Human rights defender Ales Bialiatski sentenced to 4.5 years of imprisonment, a sad day for the defence of human rights in the worldBelarus_Human rights defender Ales Bialiatski sentenced to 4.5 years of imprisonment, a sad day for the defence of human rights in the world_Russian version2 pages / 111 KB

PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY
 
BELARUS: Human rights defender Ales Bialiatski sentenced to 
4.5 years of imprisonment, a sad day for the defence of human rights in the 
world
 
Paris-Geneva, November 24, 2011. The Observatory for the 
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International 
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture 
(OMCT), condemns the sentencing to prison of Mr. Ales Bialiatski, FIDH 
Vice-President and President of the Human Rights Centre (HRC) “Viasna”, and 
denounces it as a move to silence the Belarusian civil 
society.
 
Today, the Pervomaiski District Court of Minsk sentenced human rights 
defender Ales Bialiatski to four and a half years of imprisonment under 
strict regime conditions, the 
confiscation of property and a fine for “concealment of profits on an especially 
large scale in pursuance of prior agreements” under Article 243, part 2, of the 
Criminal Code. The trial was monitored by a delegation of the 
Observatory.
 
The Observatory considers that the trial 
and detention of Mr. Ales Bialiatski, held since August 4, 2011 at the 
preventive detention centre No. 1 in Minsk, amounts to judicial harassment of a 
human rights defender for carrying out purely legitimate human rights 
activities, protected under all international human rights standards. This 
criminal case was fabricated to intimidate and silence the Belarusian civil 
society, in the current post-electoral repression of all voices dissenting with 
the regime.
 
“In Belarus, human rights organisations which carry out independent 
human rights monitoring, including the HRC “Viasna”, are systematically denied 
the right to exist and carry out ordinary activities. The Belarusian law and its 
implementation by the authorities blatantly violates international human rights 
standards binding Belarus”, says Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH President. “Human 
rights organisations cannot register and Article 193.1 of the Criminal Code even 
criminalises activities performed by non-registered organisations. Under these 
circumstances, following its closure in 2003, HRC “Viasna” had no other choice 
than open a bank account abroad or cease to exist”.
 
The criminal case was based on information provided to the Belarusian 
authorities by the Lithuanian Ministry of Justice and Attorney General of 
Poland, concerning accounts opened by Mr. Bialiatski in foreign banks to operate 
HRC “Viasna”. The Belarusian tax authorities wrongly considered the money on the 
account of Mr. Bialiatski's as his personal income and accused him of concealing 
it. This money, which was transferred by organisations for the purpose of 
funding ordinary human rights activities, was by no means used as personal funds 
but to finance legitimate activities of the HRC “Viasna”, such as election 
monitoring and assistance provided to victims of political repression. 

 
“There was never any doubt that the authorities knew that those were 
no private funds as all questioning of witnesses during the trial focused on 
“Viasna””, says Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General. “It is sad that the 
political persecution of one of the leading human rights defenders in the region 
resulted from the cooperation of EU member States delivering sensitive banking 
information to the Belarusian authorities. If the EU Guidelines on Human Rights 
Defenders are to mean anything there need to be immediate measures within the EU 
to prevent mutual legal assistance when there is a real risk to human rights 
defenders”.
 
The Observatory firmly denounces the sentencing of Mr. Bialiatski and 
calls upon the Belarusian authorities to immediately and unconditionally release 
him as his detention is arbitrary, guarantee in all circumstances his physical 
and psychological integrity, and stop any kind of harassment - including at the 
judicial level - against human rights defenders, in line with the United Nations 
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
and international human rights instruments ratified by Belarus. 
 
For more 
information on this case, please see: http://freeales.fidh.net/ as well as the previous Urgent 
Interventions issued by the Observatory.
 
For more information, please contact:
·    FIDH: Karine Appy / Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 
18
·    OMCT: Delphine 
Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 39 