Live webcast of the 47th session of the Committee against Torture
November  1, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Events / 2011 / NovemberLive webcast of the 47th session of the Committee against TortureLive webcast CAT Session1 page / 64 KB
LIVE WEBCAST OF THE 47TH
SESSION
OF THE COMMITTEE AGAINST TORTURE 
Geneva, London, Copenhagen, Oslo, 31 October 2011 – Alkarama, Amnesty
International, the Human Rights
House Foundation (HRHF), the
International Rehabilitation Council for Torture Victims (IRCT) and the World
Organisation against Torture (OMCT) will jointly webcast the 47th session
of the U.N. Committee against Torture (CAT).
Five international NGOs are
collaborating to webcast the 47th session of the Committee against
Torture, taking place in Geneva from 31 October. Viewers around the world will
be able to tune in online to watch the Committee's independent experts question
six States on their implementation of the Convention against Torture. 
This joint project of Alkarama,
Amnesty International, HRHF, IRCT and OMCT was launched to support the work of
the Committee and to ensure effective access for all interested parties,
particularly national NGOs, to follow the session in real time. 
Our organisations strongly
believe that the live webcast will ensure greater accessibility and in turn
understanding and ownership of the CAT reporting procedure, thus contributing
to better accountability and protection and promotion of human rights in the
reviewed countries. 
Live
webcast will be available at http://www.ustream.tv/channel/cat-webcast1
Our organisations will webcast
the following public sessions for which alternative reports and briefings on
the implementation of the Convention against Torture by State parties were
submitted to the CAT:
Morocco:
Alkarama
alternative report (in French)
CAT public session live webcast
on 1 November, from 10 to 12 am and on 2 November from 3 to 6 pm Geneva time.
Germany:
Amnesty
international briefing and Joint submission by
German NGOs
CAT public session live
webcast on 4 November, from 10 to 12 am and on 8 November from 3 to 6 pm Geneva
time.
Sri
Lanka: Amnesty
international briefing andFreedom From
Torture Alternative Report
CAT public session live
webcast on 8 November, from 10 to 12 am and on 9 November from 3 to 6 pm Geneva
time.
Madagascar:
OMCT alternative
report(in French) and OMCT Executive
summary (in English)
CAT public session live
webcast on 10 November, from 10 to 12 am and on 11 November from 3 to 6 pm
Geneva time.
Belarus:
Joint
NGO report supported by HRHF (in English and in Russian)
CAT public session live
webcast on 10 November, from 10 to 12 am and on 14 November from 3 to 6 pm
Geneva time.
Greece:
OMCT alternative
report and Amnesty
international briefing 
CAT public session live
webcast on 14 November, from 10 to 12 am and on 15 November from 3 to 6 pm
Geneva time. 