Russian Federation:  An umpteenth law in blatant violation of the most basic international human rights standards
October 29, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2012 / OctoberRussian Federation: An umpteenth law in blatant violation of the most basic international human rights standards


PRESS RELEASE -
THE OBSERVATORY

 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: An umpteenth law in blatant
violation of the most basic international human rights standards
 
Paris-Geneva,
October 29, 2012 – The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), expresses its grave
concern over the adoption of a new law which might lead to further
criminalising and stifling civil society in the Russian Federation.
 
On October 23, 2012, the
Russian Duma (the lower chamber of Parliament) adopted a series of amendments
to the law on treason and espionage, introducing new provisions into the
Criminal Code. The new version of the law is now expected to be examined by the
Council of Federation of the Russian Federation (the upper chamber) and, if
adopted, to be signed by President Vladimir Putin.
 
The new text expands the
definition of treason to “providing financial, technical, advisory and other
assistance to a foreign State or international organisation (…) directed at
harming Russia's security”, criminalising de facto any contact with
any foreign entity by an extremely elevated and disproportionate sanction up to
20 years' imprisonment. The vague terms used open the path to discretionary
interpretations by the authorities, raising further concerns on how the law
will be enforced.
 
It is to be noted that in
an explanatory memorandum that accompanied the bill, the Federal Security
Bureau (FSB) alleged that foreign secret services were making an “active use” of
foreign governmental as well as non-governmental organisations in order to harm
the Russian State's security. This restrictive law was adopted at the end of a
hasty legislative process, the Duma having combined its second and third
readings. 
 
The Observatory fears that,
if enacted as amended, this new version of the law would potentially target
human rights defenders, who, by the definition of their activities, are brought
to share information on the human rights situation with intergovernmental
organisations, including the United Nations and the Council of Europe, the
OSCE, of which Russia is a member, as well as with their international
partners.
 
The Observatory is all the
more concerned as this law marks an umpteenth step in the legislative and
judicial setbacks to the enjoyment of human rights in the Russian Federation.
Indeed, over the past months, a series of laws have been adopted one after the
other, in blatant violation of basic fundamental freedoms, considerably
undermining the capacities of civil society to operate in the country.
 
These legislations include
the one adopted in June 2012 that imposes further restrictions on the right to
freedom of peaceful assembly; a law adopted by the Duma on July 11 limiting
freedom of information on the Internet through a list of prohibited websites;
and a law adopted on July 13 that criminalises certain forms of libel, adding
new limits to freedom of expression.
 
During the same month, the
Duma also adopted a law imposing all non-commercial organisations (NCOs) which
receive funds from foreign sources in order to carry out any kind of “political
activities”, to register as “foreign agents” before a special governmental
agency. Furthermore, all the information published on their behalf by any means
should be produced under the notice of a production of a foreign agent. The
initial draft law provided sanctions, but the latter were removed from the text
adopted in July, and new separate amendments are now being examined in order to
be introduced into the Administrative Code. In case of failure to comply with
the numerous requirements imposed by the law on NCOs and “foreign agents”, the
entity itself as well as its legal representatives, members and participants,
are exposed to a warning and/or to administrative fines ranging from 3,000 to
500,000 Roubles (approximately 73 – 12,300 Euros). On October 25, these
repressive amendments were submitted to the Duma.
 
In addition, between
September 2011 and August 2012, a series of laws criminalising “homosexual
propaganda” have been adopted by regional and municipal assemblies, restricting
freedom of expression and putting at risk LGBT human rights defenders and
organisations.
 
The Observatory is therefore
appalled by the adoption of this new restrictive law on treason and strongly
urges the Council of Federation of the Russian Federation not to approve these
amendments. It calls on President Vladimir Putin not to sign the law if it were
to pass this last legislative step. The Observatory further calls on the
Russian authorities to conform with all their international obligations, and in
particular with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998. The Declaration indeed states that “everyone
has the right, individually and in association with others, at the national and
international levels: […] to communicate with non-governmental or
intergovernmental organisations” (Article 5 (c)). The text also guarantees
the right “to unhindered access to and communication with international
bodies with general or special competence to receive and consider
communications on matters of human rights and fundamental freedoms” (Article
9 (4)). More generally, the Observatory calls on the Russian legislative to
review and amend all the aforementioned restrictive laws.
 
“These new laws are hanging over the head of all human rights defenders
that operate in Russia, as a sword of Damocles”, deplored Souhayr
Belhassen, FIDH President. “The message sent by the government through these
pieces of legislation is not only clearly and openly hostile to a legitimate
and courageous work of the civil rights groups in the country, but tends to
damage their image and discredit them in the eyes of the the population and
marginalise them.”
 
“We are extremely concerned by
this series of new laws that aim at restricting fundamental freedoms and at
further criminalising and silencing Russian human rights defenders. It is of vital
importance that the Russian authorities put an immediate end to this
unacceptable crackdown on civil society conducted through blatant violations of
the most basic international human rights standards”, added Gerald Staberock,
OMCT Secretary General.
 
For more information,
please contact:
·      
FIDH: Arthur Manet: +33 1 43 55 25 18
·       OMCT: Delphine
Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39 