Financial support to strengthen and sustain sensitive initiatives by local human rights organisations
October  1, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Links / 2015 / OctoberFinancial support to strengthen and sustain sensitive initiatives by local human rights organisations 

OMCT provides support to
local human rights organisations from any region of the world in order to
enable them to consolidate their operational activities, allowing them to
develop sensitive initiatives and/or sustain their work, as well as to
strengthen their capacities to implement local innovative activities and
projects to prevent and respond to infringements facing human rights defenders
and their organisations.
 
The objective of this
support is to reach out, reinforce and sustain the work of local human
rights organisations worldwide (including loose and unregistered groupings)
to promote and defend respect for fundamental rights by strengthening their capacities
to prevent and respond to developments adversely affecting human rights and
human rights defenders’ movements at the local level, especially in the most
difficult countries and working on behalf of vulnerable communities. 
 
1)    Who can
apply?

Applications for grants to receive financial support to strengthen and sustain
sensitive initiatives by local human rights organisations are evaluated on a
case-by-case basis. 
 
Eligible applicants for receiving financial support should meet the following 3
criteria of identity, situation and needs:
 
1.   The applicant
is a human rights organisation working in accordance with the United
Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders (human rights organisations
that are working to promote and protect the universally recognised human rights
and freedoms of third parties and using peaceful and non-violent means in their
work);
2.   The applicant
organisation is facing risks because of its human rights work;
3.   The applicant
needs emergency support (lack of access to alternative sources of
support will be taken into account).
 
This medium to longer term
support is especially directed at groups or NGOs that have limited capacity to
approach donors, including those recently established or not having the
possibility to register in their countries of operation, those in need of a
timely and flexible response, and those working in remote and isolated areas.
 
Human rights organisations
at risk working in any region of the world, are encouraged to apply, and in
particular:
·      
Organisations working in the most difficult countries and/or in remote
locations;
·      
Organisations particularly targeted because of the issues they work on
(including the fight against torture and ill-treatment; the defence of land,
environmental and indigenous rights; of women’s and sexual rights; challenges
to violations of economic, social and cultural rights, etc.).
 
2) For which type of activity?
 
Eligible activities for financial support for local human rights
organisations include the following:
 
·     Consolidating
operational capacities of local human rights organisations, allowing them
to develop sensitive initiatives and/or sustain their work. Priority will be
given to the funding of operational activities rarely covered by other donors
yet important to the medium to long term prospects for human rights defenders,
such as:
-      
Providing a lifeline to local organisations that are
‘endangered’
by unexpected and/or grave security, financial, legal or administrative
situations through bridging funds or other financial means - where otherwise
not available - allowing them to remain operative;
-      
Leveraging emerging and innovative local protection
initiatives,
especially ones in isolated areas, whose timeliness with respect to
on-the-ground developments is crucial to influence the human rights or human
rights defenders’ situation at the local level, or strengthening human rights
defenders protection structures, such as networks, focal points or others;
      

·     Expanding
capacities to implement local innovative activities and projects to prevent
and respond to infringements facing human rights defenders and their
organisations, and to advance a human rights agenda. Support will be given to
strategies related to advocacy or public campaigns, capacity building and
trainings, documentation and printing of materials, joint development and
implementation of protection plans by human rights organisations and networks
etc. 
In particular:
-      
Campaigning and advocating for the protection of defenders
and to advance a human rights agenda, such as through national, regional and
international campaigns or advocacy missions to counter violations including
contesting laws, restrictions, sanctions and administrative provisions
restricting the work of human rights defenders, funding restrictions,
defamation and the criminalisation of human rights defenders in countries in
situations of early warning, and to support initiatives for legal and policy
changes (enabling environment, protection mechanism), etc. OMCT particularly
encourages the submission of applications from NGOs affected by foreign funding
issues.
-       Building capacities of local
organisations
by allowing them to obtain and/or conduct specific trainings in areas that
would assist in protecting them, such as physical and digital security, legal
defence, litigation, etc.
 
·     Longer-term
torture rehabilitation to human rights defenders victims of torture can
also fall among the activities to be funded under OMCT financial support to
local organisations.
 
3) How to apply?

Applications for a grant to receive financial support to a local human rights
organisation can be submitted by any human rights organisation which is facing
risks because of its human rights work and in need of support. 
 
Please use the Application
Form available in English,
French
or Spanish,
and send it by email or fax to:Formulaire Financement ONG_FR

OMCT International Secretariat
Human Rights Defenders Programme
Email: grants[at]omct.org
Tel: +41 22 809 49 39
Fax: +41 22 809 49 29

To submit the application form by encrypted email, kindly contact OMCT International
Secretariat at the above-mentioned email address.
 
Applying organisations will
need to provide evidence of support/recommendation from other professionals in
the human rights movement.
 
The amount of the grants
allocated shall range from EUR 5,000 to EUR 15,000, with an average of EUR
10,000. The duration of support shall not exceed one year.
 
All applicants will receive
a written response whether or not their application is successful.
 
A grant agreement will be
signed with human rights organisations receiving financial support, specifying
the purpose of the grant, the mutual obligations and the reporting
requirements. Depending on the size of the grant, the release of tranches of
funding may be made conditional to reporting and justification. 
 
Human rights organisations
receiving financial support will be required to provide a narrative and
financial report as well as original receipts of related expenses six
weeks after the completion of the grant. This report may include
qualitative documentation of changes in the operational capacities of human
rights organisations and advocacy outcomes. If a report including all original
receipts is not received on completion of the grant the applicant will no
longer be eligible for any further grants and will be asked to return the
funding.
 
 
OMCT is a
member of ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society. 