Bahrain:  Joint Press Release: FCO Silence on Nabeel Rajab “Appalling”, Say 17 Rights Groups & MPs
August  6, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2017 / AugustBahrain: Joint Press Release: FCO Silence on Nabeel Rajab “Appalling”, Say 17 Rights Groups & MPsJoint NGO letter to FCO on Nabeel Rajab3 pages / 352 KBJOINT PRESS RELEASE



BAHRAIN: FCO Silence on Nabeel Rajab “Appalling”, Say 17 Rights 
Groups & MPs Ahead of His Trial Tomorrow


6 August 2017 - The Foreign & Commonwealth Office's silence on the 
sentencing of human rights figure Nabeel Rajab in Bahrain has been called 
"appalling" in a letter to the Foreign Secretary, signed by 17 
rights groups & parliamentarians today. 


			 


The President of the Bahrain Center for Human Rights faces trial today, 7 
August, for tweeting about the Yemen war and torture in Bahrain. He faces up 
to 15 years. following an unfair trial, on July 10, 2017, he was sentenced 
in absentia to two years in prison for giving media interviews. Rajab has 
not been allowed to speak to his family since 15 July. Rajab has been held 
largely in solitary confinement in the first nine months of his detention. 
This led to his health deteriorating in April, and he is currently 
recovering in the Ministry of Interior clinic.

			 


Despite British Embassy representatives regularly attending Rajab's 
trials, the 10 July sentence, which clearly violated his freedom of 
expression, went unremarked on for over two weeks. On 26 July, the FCO 
stated in 
response 
to a parliamentary question: 
"We note the two year sentence given to him and understand there 
are further steps in the judicial process, including the right of 
appeal."

			 


The letter, signed by 17 rights groups says: "It is appalling that 
while the FCO recognises the brave work of human rights defenders worldwide, 
it has turned a blind eye to the human rights abuses in Bahrain, including 
the reprisals against Mr. Rajab." They raise the 
FCO's 
Human Rights and Democracy Repor
t, published last month, which applauds the work of human rights defenders 
globally, and state that silence on Rajab's case contradicts policies to 
support human rights defenders.

			 


The FCO's response evaded providing an opinion on Rajab's sentence 
and compares unfavourably with its response to a previous sentence Rajab 
received in 2012 on similar charges related to his expression. At that time, 
Middle East Minister Alistair Burt stated he was 

“very concerned”
 at the sentencing of Mr. Rajab on charges related to his free 
expression, and added, “I have made it clear to the Bahraini 
authorities that the human and civil rights of peaceful opposition figures 
must be respected.” Burt was reshuffled out of the Foreign Office in 
2013, but reappointed Middle East Minister following the June 
election.

			 


The rights groups told the Foreign Secretary today: "British silence on 
this case contradicts FCO support for human rights defenders internationally 
and the FCO’s own past record on Mr. Rajab’s case. We urge you 
to overturn this policy of silence and support Nabeel Rajab and all human 
rights defenders in Bahrain (...) by condemning his sentence and calling on 
the Government of Bahrain for his immediate and unconditional release and 
the dropping of all pending charges against him."

			 


While the UK was initially silent on Rajab's sentence, key allies of 
Bahrain including the  United 
States  and the 

European 
Union  as well 
as  

Germany  and 


Norway  all called for 
Rajab's release shortly after the ruling. The US, EU and Norway called 
for Rajab's release, and Germany deplored his sentence. The UN High 
Commissioner for Human Rights' office 

called  for his 
unconditional release.

			 

"The FCO's weak language on Nabeel Rajab's case 
falls in line with the UK's overall disappointing position on free 
expression in Bahrain and more widely in the Gulf. Boris Johnson should call 
for Rajab's immediate release and take broader steps to ensure that 
human rights - not just arms sales - are a priority in the UK's 
relations with Bahrain and the other Gulf states",  
said Rebecca Vincent, UK Bureau Director for Reporters 
Without Borders.

			 

"Instead of working with civil society and human rights 
defenders to address systemic problems and reform in Bahrain, as it has 
previously committed to, the government of Bahrain continues to persecute 
human rights defenders like Nabeel Rajab simply for exercising their right 
and duty to promote and protect human rights,"  said Andrew Anderson, Executive Director of Front Line 
Defenders.

			 


Sayed Ahmed Alwadaei, Director of Advocacy, Bahrain Institute for Rights and 
Democracy: "Boris Johnson should be ashamed of his isolated 
policy, which is at total odds with the foreign policy of all Bahrain 
western allies and partners. True partners should speak out to their allies 
when they cross the line. The Bahraini government's abuses don't 
seem to matter to Boris Johnson's Foreign Office, which only 
appears to be vocal against repression when it's by governments 
that don’t host the Royal Navy or trade with the UK.”


			 


The letter was signed by Article 19, English PEN, FIDH, Front Line 
Defenders, Index on Censorship, the Jimmy Wales Foundation, PEN 
International, Reporters Without Borders and the World Organisation Against 
Torture, alongside the Bahrain Institute for Rights and Democracy, Americans 
for Democracy & Human Rights in Bahrain, Gulf Centre for Human Rights 
and European Centre for Democracy and Human Rights. The letter was also 
signed by Sue Willman, Director of Deighton Pierce Glynn, Julie Ward MEP and 
Tom Brake MP.

			 


“Nabeel Rajab is not a criminal, he is a 
human rights defender. His ongoing arbitrary detention and the endless 
postponements of court hearings are unacceptable, and require a strong 
reaction from Bahrain’s international partners. Bahrain's 
authorities cannot get away with their crackdown any longer”, 
said the Observatory.

			 


The Bar Human Rights Committee of England and Wales is also separately 
seeking an urgent meeting with the Foreign Secretary to raise concerns over 
the treatment of human rights defenders in Bahrain and about the breaches of 
freedom of expression and fair trial and due process in Nabeel Rajab's 
case.

			 

“The trial in absence and subsequent imprisonment of 
Nabeel Rajab was in flagrant breach of his rights to a fair trial process. 
The criminalisation of Nabeel Rajeb - for sharing an opinion - is contrary 
to international rights and protections of freedom of expression. Whilst Mr. 
Rajab’s health continues to deteriorate, due his treatment in prison, 
this case stands as a sad indictment of Bahrain’s attitude to citizens 
who voice criticism. It is not too late for proper due process to be applied 
in this case; this would result in Mr. Rajab’s immediate 
release,” said Kirsty Brimelow QC of 
Doughty Street Chambers. 