Child Rights Program internship
April 11, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Links / 2017 / AprilChild Rights Program internship





INTERNSHIP ANNOUNCEMENT
 
Child Rights PROGRAM
The World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), the largest international coalition of
nongovernmental organisations fighting against torture, summary executions,
forced disappearances and all other forms of cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment, is currently seeking to recruit ONE INTERN for our child
rights program. 
Location: International
Secretariat of the OMCT, Geneva, Switzerland
Dates and duration:  The position should be filled
as soon as possible, for a minimum of 3 months. Application date: until 19
April 2017
The internship should start the 21 April 2017
Please
note that internships are not remunerated.
RESPONSIBILITIES: 
 
The
incumbent will work under the supervision of the Coordinator of the Child
Rights Activities and his/her activities will include: 
 

To carry out research on torture,  juvenile justice, children in detention
     and others.
To assist with the organisation of field missions.
To assist the Coordinator with a monitoring project being carried
     out in Benin, Uruguay and the Philippines to protect children deprived of
     liberty from torture and ill-treatment.
To attend meetings and sessions of the United Nations human rights
     mechanisms; 
Within the larger framework of the OMCT activities:  to draft press releases, to
     translate documents, to attend meetings with partner NGOs, and others.

PROFILE

University
     degree in law, international relations, social sciences or related field.
Good
     knowledge of the UN procedures and regional mechanisms for the protection
     of human rights, particularly torture related mechanisms.
Interest
     in child rights
Excellent
     drafting and editing skills
Excellent
     organizational skills
Ability to
     work under pressure to deadlines and to adapt to multidisciplinary work in
     the environment of a multicultural team. 
Good
     interpersonal and communication skills.
Fluency in
     oral and written French and English. Knowledge of Spanish will be
     appreciated.

Applications for this position should be sent (by email only) to
Carolina Bárbara at  cb@omct.org.  For consideration, please send a cover
letter and a résumé, indicating “STAGE “ as 
your message Subject. Only shortlisted candidates will be considered. 
For more information about the OMCT, please visit our website: www.omct.org 