Iran:  New prison sentence issued against imprisoned woman human rights defender, a travesty of justice
May 20, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2016 / MayIran: New prison sentence issued against imprisoned woman human rights defender, a travesty of justice

Paris-Geneva,
May 20, 2016. The ongoing judicial harassment against the arbitrarily
imprisoned human rights defender Ms. Nargess Mohammadi in Iran should stop and
she must be released immediately, said the Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of FIDH and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT). 

 ©
International Campaign for Human Rights in IranOn May 18,
2016, Ms. Nargess Mohammadi, Spokesperson and Vice-President
of the Defenders of Human Rights Centre (DHRC), was notified of the new
sentence issued by Branch 15 of the Islamic Revolution Court against her: a
total of 16 years consisting of five years for “assembly and collusion to
commit crimes against national security”, one year for “spreading propaganda
against the State”, and 10 years for “establishing and running the illegal
splinter group LEGAM”[1].
Under Article 134 of the 2013 Islamic Penal Code, if the sentence is upheld on
appeal, she will have to serve the highest sentence, i.e. 10 years
imprisonment. She will be appealing the new sentence.
 
Ms. Mohammadi
commenced serving an arbitrary six-year prison sentence on April 21, 2012, but
she was released on July 31, 2012 on bail for medical reasons, as she suffered
from muscular paralysis and lung complications. She was arbitrarily re-arrested
on May 5, 2015, allegedly in order to serve the remainder of the
same six-year prison sentence, although she was still suffering from the same
diseases. Ms. Mohammadi was
particularly targeted after she met with then European Union (EU) High
Representative Ms. Ashton in Tehran during the latter’s visit in March 2014,
which prompted the charge of “spreading propaganda against the State” in the
new case.
 
Ms. Mohammadi
was transferred to hospital in October 2015 after suffering nervous attacks,
where she was under round the clock watch and was chained hand and foot to her
bed and suffered convulsions at least three times. 
 
Ms. Mohammadi has been facing continuous judicial harassment related to
her human rights work, in and out of prison, including repeated summons,
interrogations and trials for several years now[2].
She received the “City of Paris” medal in May 2016.
 
The Observatory urges the Iranian authorities to guarantee the physical
and psychological integrity of Ms. Mohammadi, and to release her immediately
and unconditionally since her detention is arbitrary as
it only aims at sanctioning her human rights activities.
The Observatory more generally urges the Iranian authorities to put an end to
all harassment - including at the judicial level - against all human rights
defenders in Iran.

 
The
Observatory further urges the EU and the French Government to intervene on Ms.
Mohammadi’s behalf, as well as the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention, which has received an official complaint regarding Ms. Mohammadi’s
case, to urgently issue an Opinion on her case.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders.



[1] LEGAM
(“Step by Step to Stop the Death Penalty”) is a group of human rights
activists, which campaigns for the abolition of death penalty in Iran. It has
never been declared illegal. Ms. Mohammadi joined LEGAM after it was
established. 


[2] See Observatory Press Releases of
May 5, 2015, July 10, 2015, and October 19, 2015. 