Turkey:  Arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of 11 members of the Central Council of the Turkish Medical Association (TTB)
January 31, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2018 / JanuaryTurkey: Arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of 11 members of the Central Council of the Turkish Medical Association (TTB)
URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
TUR 001 / 0118 / OBS 014
Arbitrary detention / 
Judicial harassment /
Defamation /
Restrictions to Freedom of Expression
Turkey
January 31, 2018
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Turkey. 
Description of the situation:
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the arbitrary
detention and judicial harassment of 11 members of the Central Council of the Turkish
Medical Association (TTB)[1]
including its President Dr. Raşit Tükel
as well as Mr. Sezai Berber, Mr. Sinan Adıyaman, Ms. Selma Güngör, Mr. Şeyhmus Gökalp, Ms. Hande
Arpat, Mr. Ayfer Horasan, Mr. Taner Gören, Ms. Funda Obuz, Mr. Yaşar
Ulutaş and Mr. Nazım Yılmaz.
According to the information received, in the morning of January 30,
2018, the Turkish police searched the homes and workplaces and detained 11
members of TTB in Ankara, Istanbul, Diyarbakır and Eskişehir following the
issuing of detention warrants against them by the Ankara Chief Public
Prosecutor’s Office. The detention warrants establish that they shall be
detained for at least seven days on the grounds of “making propaganda for a terrorist
organisation” and “instigating people towards grudge and hostility” in line
with the 3713 numbered Anti-terror Law. 
Their arbitrary detention and judicial harassment are related to the
publication of a statement on January 24, 2018, in which TBB called for an end
to the Turkish military’s “Operation Olive Branch”[2]
in Afrin, northern Syria, and in which TTB argued that “war is a problem of
public health”. Following the publication of the statement the Ankara Office of
the TTB and some individual members of TTB’s Central Council received a large
number of threats by email, phone calls and social media. In addition,
President Recep Tayyip Erdogan publicly stigmatised TTB during a speech on
January 26, 2018, calling them “terror supporters” and the Turkish Ministry of
Health Ahmet Demircan stated that “the TTB does not represent the doctors in
Turkey”.
The Observatory denounces that these attacks against TTB and its members take place
in the context of an ongoing crackdown against human rights defenders in
Turkey, which only aim at silencing their peaceful and legitimate human rights
activities.
The Observatory therefore urges the Turkish authorities to immediately
and unconditionally release the 11 members of TTB who have been arbitrarily
arrested as well as to put an end to all forms of harassment against them
including at the judicial level.
Actions requested:
Please write to the authorities of Turkey asking them to:
i.       Immediately and unconditionally release Dr. Raşit Tükel, Mr. Sezai
Berber, Mr. Sinan Adıyaman, Ms. Selma Güngör, Mr. Şeyhmus Gökalp, Ms. Hande
Arpat, Mr. Ayfer Horasan, Mr. Taner Gören, Ms. Funda Obuz, Mr. Yaşar Ulutaş
and Mr. Nazım Yılmaz, and put an end to all acts of harassment, including at
the judicial level against them and other TTB members;
ii.      Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of Dr. Raşit Tükel, Mr.
Sezai Berber, Mr. Sinan Adıyaman, Ms. Selma Güngör, Mr. Şeyhmus Gökalp, Ms.
Hande Arpat, Mr. Ayfer Horasan, Mr. Taner Gören, Ms. Funda Obuz, Mr. Yaşar
Ulutaş and Mr. Nazım Yılmaz, as
well as that of all members of TTB and, more generally, that of all human
rights defenders in Turkey;
iii.     Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN General Assembly on
December 9, 1998, in particular its Articles 1, 6(a), 9, 11 and 12.2;
iv.    Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by Turkey.
Addresses:
·        
President of Turkey, Mr. Recep
Tayyip Erdoğan, Fax: (+90 312) 525 58 31
·        
Prime Minister of Turkey,
Mr. Binali Yıldırım. E-mail: ozelkalem@basbakanlik.gov.tr
·        
Minister of Justice,
Mr. Bekir Bozdağ. E-mail: ozelkalem@adalet.gov.tr
·        
Minister of Interior,
Mr. Süleyman Soylu. Fax: +90 (312) 425 61 30
·        
Minister of Health, Mr.
Ahmet Demircan. E-mail:
eposta@saglik.gov.tr  
·        
Ambassador Izzet Selim
Yenel, Diplomatic Mission of Turkey to the European Union in Brussels, Belgium.
Fax: + 32 2 511 04 50
·        
Ambassador Mr. Ali Naci
Koru, Permanent Mission of Turkey to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland.
Email: mission.turkey@ties.itu.int
Please also write to the diplomatic
mission or embassy of Turkey in your respective country.
***
Geneva-Paris, January 31, 2018
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
The Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this
programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against
human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union
Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
•   E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
•   Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
•   Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1]              Established
in 1953, the Turkish Medical Association (TTB) is a chamber of medical doctors
in Turkey. The TTB aspires to defend the rights of doctors, represent for the
profession of medical doctors and protect the ethic codes, contribute to
medical education, improve and disseminate public health in Turkey. Its
membership covers almost 60% of Turkey’s doctors with their members around
85.000 and it is affiliated to the World Medical Association.


[2]              The military offensive began on January 20, 2018, and is directed at the
Kurdish Autonomous Administration’s military wing, the People’s Protection
Units (YPG). Turkish authorities have cited YPG’s links to the armed Kurdistan
Workers’ Party (PKK) as the grounds for this military offensive. 