Azerbaijan:  Joint press release: ‘No More Business As Usual’ for Azerbaijan
November 17, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Azerbaijan / 2014 / NovemberAzerbaijan: Joint press release: ‘No More Business As Usual’ for AzerbaijanInternational Partnership for Human Rights
and Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (FIDH-OMCT) Call
for the Immediate Release of Azeri Human Rights Defenders 
Azerbaijan’s
six-month chairmanship of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
came to an end last week. During this period Azerbaijan unleashed an
unprecedented crackdown against civil society — including the imprisonment of
human rights defenders and political activists who criticized the Azeri
government. 
“The
status of the Council of Europe are crystal clear “Every member of the Council
of Europe must accept the principles of the rule of law and of the enjoyment by
all persons within its jurisdiction of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
and collaborate sincerely and effectively in the realisation” of  the “maintenance and further
realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms”. The Azerbaijan actions reveal a new attack to the
European institutions and values. It is
time to save these values, the commitments and the soul of the Council of
Europe. Now,” said Azeri investigative journalist, Khadija Ismayilova.
We
call on the EU and its member states to use all the instruments at their
disposal to put pressure on Azerbaijan in order to ensure it complies with its
human rights obligations and it immediately and unconditionally releases all
those who have been detained on unfounded charges. 
Those
imprisoned during Azerbaijan’s chairmanship (14 May – 13 November 2014) include:
-
Anar Mammadli, election monitor who received the Václav Havel Human Rights
Prize.
-
Leyla Yunus, justice advocate who received the French Legion of Honor, and her
husband, Arif Yunus.
-
Rasul Jafarov, campaigner who criticized Azerbaijan at the Council of Europe
and compiled with Leyla Yunus a list of 100 political prisoners in Azerbaijan. 
-
Intigam Aliyev, human rights lawyer who criticized Azerbaijan at the Council of
Europe
Please
watch No More Business As Usual for
Azerbaijan here: http://youtu.be/t2sjdYGGbAk 