Algeria:  Arbitrary arrest and secret detention of Mr. Mohamed Boucekkine
June 20, 2007
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Algeria / 2007 / JuneAlgeria: Arbitrary arrest and secret detention of Mr. Mohamed BoucekkineDZA 200607 Arbitrary arrest/ Secret detention/ Risk of torture The International Secretariat of the World Organization against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Algeria.  Description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source and by Antenna International, member of the SOS-Torture network, of the arbitrary arrest and the secret detention of Mr. Mohamed Boucekkine in Fouka. According to the information received, Mr. Mohamed Boucekkine, age 34, was arrested on Friday, 15 June 2007 at 6:30 pm in his residence in Fouka. Two individuals in civilian have reportedly entered his house without identifying themselves, asked for his papers and have proceeded to a search of the house. His arrest has reportedly taken place in front of his wife and children as well as a cousin. It is reported that, when asking where her husband was being taken to, his wife got the answer that he was only being interrogated. According to this information, Mr. Mohamed Boucekkine was not able to contact his family nor to consult a lawyer. Since his arrest, his place of detention as well as the charges against him remain unknown. The International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its deep concern about the alleged arrest and secret detention of Mr. Mohamed Boucekkine as well as for the risks of torture he incurs, and asks the Algerian authorities to locate his whereabouts as soon as possible while guaranteeing his physical and psychological integrity. OMCT recalls that Algeria is a State Party to the UN Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment that prohibits torture and ill-treatments. Moreover, OMCT urges the Algerian authorities to guarantee the liberty of their citizens in all circumstances, in accordance with article 9.1 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which Algeria is a Sate Party that specifies that “no one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest or detention.” Actions requested  Please write to the authorities in Algeria urging them to:  Take all the necessary measures to locate M. Mohamed Boucekkine; Guarantee the security and physical and psychological integrity of M. Mohamed Boucekkine, providing him with medical care if necessary; Order the immediate release of M. Mohamed Boucekkine in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent with international law and standards, or if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times; Order a thorough and impartial investigation into these events in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; Ensure the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses   Mr. Abdelaziz Bouteflika, President of the Republic, El Mouradia-BP Alger Gare, Fax 00213 21 69 15 95, E-mail: President@el-mouradia.dz Mr. Tayeb Belaiz, Ministre of Justice, Ministry of Justice, 8 Place Bir-Hakem El-Biar, Alger, Algeria, Fax 00 213 21 92 17 01/ 29 56, E-mail: info@mjustice.dz H.E. Idriss Jazaïry, Ambassador, Permanent representative of Algeria at the UN in Geneva, Route de Lausanne 308, CH-1293, Bellevue, Switzerland, E-mail: mission.algerie@mission-algerie.ch, Fax: +4122 / 774.30.49 H.E. Halim Benattallah, Ambassador of Algeria in Belgium, Avenue Molière 207, 1050 Brussels, Fax: 0032 343 51 68, E-mail: Iinfo@algerian-embassy.be  Please also write to the embassies of Algeria in your respective country. *** Geneva, 20 June 2007 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 