Egypt:  Free Hossam Bahgat, prominent human rights defender
November  9, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2015 / NovemberEgypt: Free Hossam Bahgat, prominent human rights defender 

Brussels, 9 November 2015 - EuroMed Rights, Front Line Defenders
and
the Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders (a joint FIDH and OMCT programme) express
their deep concern over Egypt’s Military Prosecution and detention of
journalist and human rights defender Hossam
Bahgat, a decision that was ordered today until Wednesday 11 November. 
 
Hossam
Bahgat, last seen Sunday evening, is reported to be detained pending
investigation on charges of “publishing false news that harms national
interests” and “disseminating information that disturbs public peace” for
publishing reports about Egypt's military. 
 
Our
organisations believe the charges held against Bahgat are part of an ongoing
campaign of judicial harassment and repression against journalists and human
rights defenders in Egypt. We call for the immediate release of the prominent human rights defender.
 
On
November 5th, Hossam Bahgat received a summons from Military
Intelligence at his home in Alexandria. Arriving at the Military Intelligence
headquarters in Nasr City in Cairo at 9 am on Sunday, November 7th,
he was forbidden to enter with his phone, or be accompanied by a lawyer. After
several hours, Bahgat was transferred to Military Prosecution and interrogated
into the night in the presence of his lawyers. Finally his overnight detention
was ordered at the headquarters of the Military Intelligence until it delivers
its final decision on his case.  
 
Our
organisations strongly condemn the arrest and detention of Hossam Bahgat. We
fear that the charges against him are solely motivated to deter his courageous
media work and his peaceful human rights activism. 
 
Hossam Bahgat is a journalist and prominent human rights defender. His
investigative stories appear in the independent news service Mada Masr.
From 2002 to 2013, he was the founding executive director of the Egyptian
Initiative for Personal Rights where he still serves as chairman. In 2010,
Human Rights Watch awarded Bahgat the Allison
Des Forges Award for Extraordinary Activism. The human rights defender is
known for his intense criticism of human rights crimes committed by Egypt's
army over the past five years. Since 2014, Bahgat has published a series of
investigative reports in Mada Masr on the increasing powers of
Egypt's army, denouncing the use of military tribunals against civilians and
reporting the corruption of the family of former Egyptian president, Hosni
Mubarak. 