Egypt:  A year after Regeni’s death, still no justice or steps to end torture in Egypt
January 25, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / Egypt / 2017 / JanuaryEgypt: A year after Regeni’s death, still no justice or steps to end torture in Egypt
Geneva, 25 January 2017 – On the first anniversary of the death of Italian
student Giulio Regeni, Egypt still has not brought before justice those
responsible for his enforced disappearance, torture and killing.
It has also been two years since Egypt – now a member of the United
Nations Human Rights Council – has committed before the international
community to bring its instruments for the prevention of torture in compliance
with international standards. Yet the country has to this day shown no sign of
wanting to effectively fight against torture.
Regeni, a 28-year-old PhD candidate at Cambridge University conducting
his research on labour rights and independent trade unions in Egypt,
disappeared in the outskirts of Cairo on 25 January 2016. His body, found nine days
after in a ditch, showed signs of severe torture. The investigation into his
case has so far lacked independence and effectiveness, for it followed a number
of false tracks, observers have said[1]. Moreover,
Regeni’s death is only the tip of the iceberg of widespread human rights
violations happening in the country, where an average of three to four people are
disappeared and tortured every day, according to recent reports[2].
“This is a sad anniversary that reminds us that it is time for Egyptian
authorities to hold their word and finally put into practice their commitments
to the eradication of torture in the country,” declared Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General. 
In March 2015, Egypt agreed before the UN Human Rights Council to follow
four main recommendations coming from the country’s Universal Periodic Review to
strengthen the fight against torture. The Egyptian Government, however, has not
yet ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention Against Torture (OPCAT), still
has not submitted a report to the United Nations Committee Against
Torture (UNCAT) since 2002, while it is supposed to submit one every four years. Nor
has Egypt issued an open and standing invitation to the Special Rapporteur on
Torture nor brought the definition of the crime of torture in its Penal Code in
line with the definition contained in Article 1(1) of the Convention Against Torture.
Instead, throughout the past two years, the Egyptian authorities have
been undermining any attempt to effectively fight torture in the country. This
included criminalizing three members of the “United Group – Attorneys-at-law,
Legal Advisors”[3], for presenting before the
Egyptian authorities a bill for the prevention of torture and advocating for
its adoption in order to bring the national legislation in compliance with
international standards. 
Moreover, a local organization, the “El Nadeem Center for the
Rehabilitation of Victims of Torture and Violence”, has been subjected to threats
of closure, assets freezing and administrative harassment for conducting
activities beyond its victims’ assistance mandate, such as producing torture
reports and statistics.[4] 
Despite all this, Egypt was last year awarded a seat on the Human Rights Council until
2020. The council is made of 47 Member States, elected based on candidates’
“contribution to the promotion and protection of human rights, as well as their
voluntary pledges and commitments in this regard”. 
About the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
OMCT is short for the World
Organisation Against Torture – in French, as the organization created in 1985
is headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland. OMCT works for, with and through an
international coalition of over 200 non-governmental organizations – the
SOS-Torture network – fighting torture, summary executions, enforced
disappearances, arbitrary detentions, and all other cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment or punishment in the world. 
For more information, please
visit: www.omct.org 
For our latest campaign
#HumansAgainstTorture: www.joinhat.org.
Follow #OMCT30Forum this
week and read us online: Twitter, Facebook,
https://vimeo.com/omct,
Instagram.
For information on this press release, please contact Human Rights
Officer Chiara Cosentino (cc@omct.org) or Lori
Brumat, OMCT Head of Communications (lb@omct.org).



[1] The Guardian, Who
murdered Giulio Regeni?, 4 October 2016, available at 


[2] Amnesty
International Report, Egypt: ‘Officially, you do not exist’ – Disappeared and
tortured in the name of counter-terrorism.. 


[3] For more
information, see the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders’ Urgent
Appeal.


[4] For more
information, see the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders’ Urgent
Appeal.. 