Bahrain:  Summons of Mr. Nabeel Rajab for interrogation
June  3, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2011 / JuneBahrain: Summons of Mr. Nabeel Rajab for interrogation

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
 
New information
BHR 006 / 0511 / OBS 080.1
Judicial harassment / Intimidation
Bahrain
June 3, 2011
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests 
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Bahrain.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the 
summons of Mr. Nabeel Rajab, President of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR) and Deputy 
Secretary General of FIDH, for interrogation by the Military 
Prosecutor.
 
According to the information received, on May 31, 2011, Mr. Nabeel 
Rajab received a letter from the Military Prosecutor at 4 pm, summoning him to 
appear at 6 pm the same day. On such a short notice, Mr. Rajab could not get his 
lawyer to accompany him. He was interrogated for several hours and remained 
within the military premises until 11.30 pm. 
 
During his interrogation, Mr. Rajab was extensively questioned about 
his human rights activities and verbally condemned for expressing his opinion 
about the ongoing repression in Bahrain. He was also interrogated about his 
communication with international media outlets, and about his use of the social 
media tool Twitter. On this occasion, Mr. Rajab was informed that he might be referred to the Military Court on four charges, punishable by at least four years and three months in prison and a 
fine of at least 500 Bahraini Dinar (950 Euros): “insulting the King”, “disseminating false reports, statements or 
malicious rumours seeking to damage public security, terrorise the population or 
cause damage to the public interest” pursuant to Article 168-1 ; “releasing false or malicious news, statements or rumours abroad about 
domestic condition in the State, so as to undermine the State's prestige, 
position, or national interests” pursuant to Article 134 and “inciting sectarian strife and undermining the public peace” 
pursuant to Article 172 of the Bahrain Criminal Code. 
 
The Observatory denounces these acts of intimidation and reprisals 
against Mr. Nabeel Rajab, which seem to merely aim at sanctioning his human 
rights activities and preventing him from carrying out such 
activities.
 
The Observatory recalls that dozens of human rights defenders are 
currently facing charges or threatened thereof for their alleged support of the 
social protest demonstrations of February 2011 or face travel bans to prevent 
them from addressing regional and international fora about human rights 
violations committed in Bahrain.
 
More generally, the Observatory is also increasingly concerned about 
the context of great insecurity that human rights defenders face in Bahrain, in 
light of the current violent repression of protests. The Observatory once again 
calls for the immediate end to the harsh repression, which blatantly violates 
fundamental human rights such as freedoms of expression and peaceful assembly. 

 
Background Information:
 
In the early morning of May 21, 2011, while the whole Rajab family 
was still asleep, tear-gas bombs were shot into the house, breaking the window 
where Mr. Nabeel Rajab's brother, Nader Rajab, lives with his family. Nobody 
could see the attackers. The family had to rescue Mr. Nader Rajab, his wife and 
daughter who were suffocating in the room. Mr. Rajab did not file a complaint 
for fear of reprisals.
 
Actions requested:
 
The Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to: 
 
i.         
Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Nabeel 
Rajab and his family as well as all human rights defenders in 
Bahrain;
 
ii.       
Put an end to any acts of harassment, including at the judicial 
level, against Mr. Rajab as well as against all human rights defenders in 
Bahrain; 
 
iii.      
Conform in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration 
on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations 
General Assembly, in particular :
-          its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, 
individually or in association with others, to promote the protection and 
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and 
international levels” ;
-          and its Article 12.2 which states that “the State shall take all 
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of 
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, 
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or 
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of 
the rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 
iv.      Ensure in all circumstances 
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with 
international human rights standards and international instruments ratified by 
Bahrain. 
 
Addresses: 
 
·         
Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA , King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 
587
·         
Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tel: 
+973 172 27 555; Fax : +973 172 12 6032
·         
Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and Islamic 
Affairs, Tel: +973 175 31 333; Fax: +973 175 31 284 
·         
Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the United Nations in Geneva, 1 
chemin Jacques-Attenville, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, CP 39, 1292 Chambésy, 
Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch 
 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of Bahrain in your 
respective countries. *** Paris-Geneva, June 3, 2011
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this 
appeal in your reply.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.orgTel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 
29 