Yougoslavia, Federal Rep.of:  Yougoslavia: police attack on Roma settlement
June 16, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Yougoslavia, Federal Rep.of / 2000 / JuneYougoslavia, Federal Rep.of: Yougoslavia: police attack on Roma settlementYugoslavia: evicted Roma inhabitants suffer ill-treatment and insults by police officers  Case YUG 160600  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Greek Helsinki Monitor that on 7th June, 32 adults and 77 children (See Case YUG 160600.CC), half of whom are displaced persons from Kosovo, were ill-treated and insulted by police as bulldozers demolished their homes, the Roma "Antena" settlement in Surcin just outside of Belgrade.  The police, in uniform and plain clothes, arrived in the settlement in two groups.  They hurled racial insults at the Roma and slapped, punched and kicked a number of them, including women and children.  A Roma man was reportedly taken to the police station where he was physically and verbally abused for several hours.  Their property was then damaged when the bulldozers flattened their homes.  Prior to this, on 6th June, the authorities of the Novi Beograd municipality ordered the demolition o the "Antena" settlement, which was built in defiance of zoning laws, and the eviction of the Roma inhabitants was ordered.  According to the information received, an appeal for more time to find other accommodation was turned down.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia urging them to:  take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned persons and put an immediate end to the persecution and harassment of the all Roma people in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia; guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these events, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; intervene with the appropriate authorities in order to secure that the adequate medical assistance is provided to those who received injuries in this incident; guarantee adequate restitution, compensation and rehabilitation to all injured people; guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  The President of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Slobodan Milosevic. Fax: +38111636775 The Minister of the Interior. Fax +381113618366  Momir Bulatovic, Federal Prime Minister, Office of the Federal Prime Minister, Palace of Federation, Belgrade, Serbia, Yugoslavia. Fax +38111637185  Geneva, June 16, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 