Egypt:  ?Press release: Increased repression against human rights defenders
October 28, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2014 / OctoberEgypt: ​Press release: Increased repression against human rights defendersEgypt_2810142 pages / 125 KBParis-Geneva, October 28, 2014 – The Observatory for the Protection 
of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International 
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against 
Torture (OMCT), deplores the sentence against Ms. Yara Sallam, 
Transitional Justice Officer at the Egyptian Initiative for Personal 
Rights (EIPR), Ms. Sanaa Seif, a member of the “No to Military Trials 
for Civilians” movement and sister of the blogger Mr. Alaa Abdel Fattah,
 and 21 other co-defendants to three years in prison for allegedly 
“participating in a peaceful march”. The Observatory is also deeply 
concerned about the unlawful re-arrest of Mr. Alaa Abdel-Fattah, civil 
and political rights activist, blogger and member of the “No to Military
 Trials for Civilians” movement. On October 26, 2014, Ms. 
Yara Sallam and Ms. Sanaa Seif, who have been held in pre-trial 
detention since their arrest on June 21 without grounds or 
justification, were sentenced along 21 other protesters to three years 
in prison, an additional three years of police surveillance,  a 10,000 
EGP fine (1,000 euros), and repayment for property damages they 
allegedly caused. They were sentenced on charges of breaching the 
protest law, and for other trumped-up charges such as damaging property 
and “displaying force”. The charges relate to a demonstration on June 
21, 2014 against the repressive anti-protest law (Law 107/2013), which 
was forcibly dispersed by security forces aided by unknown assailants in
 civilian attire. This sentence came a day before an Egyptian 
court ordered prominent activist Alaa Abdel-Fattah back to jail at the 
start of his retrial along with 24 other individuals. On October 27, 
2014, the judge ordered the detention of all those present and postponed
 the trial to November 11. While all present defendants were transferred
 to Tora prison, Alaa Abdel-Fattah's whereabouts remain unknown. Mr.
 Abdel-Fattah was convicted on June 11 along with 24 individuals on 
charges including organising an unauthorised demonstration in November 
2013 and allegedly assaulting a police officer. He was sentenced in 
absentia to 15 years in prison, a fine of LE 100,000 (approximately EUR 
10,420) and five-years of police surveillance. On September 15th, the 
judge presiding over the retrial stepped down at the request of defence 
lawyers, a retrial was ordered, and Mr. Abdel-Fattah and 2 others were 
released on bail after more than three months imprisonment.In 
both cases, the charges were largely based on the draconian protest law 
that infringes on Egyptians’ constitutional right to freedom of assembly
 and expression, as well as Egypt's international legal obligations. 
These decisions come amid escalating measures by the government that are
 effectively shutting down democratic means for citizens to voice any 
grievances. In recent months, trials of human rights defenders, 
peaceful protesters and journalists have been marred by absolute 
disregard for due process rights and reliance on dubious evidence – 
frequently limited to police or other security services' reports. Such
 ongoing judicial harassment and arbitrary detention is one more 
evidence of the continued criminalisation of human rights defenders' 
activities in Egypt. The Observatory fears that all those 
convicted or detained these past few days were targeted solely for 
exercising their right to freedom of expression and assembly, and their 
detention and sentencing only aim to sanction their legitimate human 
rights activities. Accordingly, the Observatory calls on the 
authorities to drop all charges held against them, and immediately and 
unconditionally release them, in compliance with the United Nations 
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights and other international human rights instruments ratified 
by Egypt. For more information, please contact:·       FIDH: Arthur Manet/Audrey Couprie: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18·       OMCT: Miguel Martin Zumalacarregui: +41 22 809 49 22 