Bahrain:  Provisional release and ongoing judicial harassment of Ms. Ebtisam Al-Saegh, Mr. Mohammed Al-Shakhoori, and Mr. Radhi Saleh Al-Qatari
October 26, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2017 / OctoberBahrain: Provisional release and ongoing judicial harassment of Ms. Ebtisam Al-Saegh, Mr. Mohammed Al-Shakhoori, and Mr. Radhi Saleh Al-Qatari


URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
New
information
BHR 003 / 0717 / OBS 076.3
Provisional release /
Judicial harassment /
Ill-treatment and torture
Bahrain
October 26, 2017
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Bahrain.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by
reliable sources about the provisional release and ongoing judicial harassment
against Ms. Ebtisam Al-Saegh,
Monitoring and Documentation Officer at the NGO Salam for Democracy and Human
Rights, Mr. Mohammed Al-Shakhoori,
an online activist who is a member of Al Wefaq Directory of Rights and Freedoms[1],
and Mr. Radhi Saleh Al-Qatari, a
member of the Manama Observatory for Human Rights[2]. 
 
According to the information
received, on October 22, 2017, Ms.
Ebtisam Al-Saegh, Mr. Mohammed Al-Shakhoori and Mr. Radhi Saleh Al-Qatari were
provisionally released from detention. Mr. Radhi Saleh Al-Qatari had been
detained since May 28, 2017 and Ms. Ebtisam Al-Saegh, Mr. Mohammed Al-Shakhoori
since July 4, 2017. Charges under the Anti-Terrorism law are still
pending against them (see background
information).
 
The three
human rights defenders were held under particularly harsh conditions and
several allegations of torture and ill-treatment against them have been
reported. Ms. Al-Saegh has reported having suffered acts of torture,
including severe beatings on the head, sexual abuse, insults and threats while
being interrogated by the National Security Agency (NSA).
Mr. Radhi Saleh Al-Qatari also reported being tortured by NSA agents while in
detention. Throughout their detention, the three human rights defenders were also
prevented from accessing their lawyers and family members (see background
information).
 
The Observatory expresses its outmost concerns over
the allegations of torture and ill-treatment while in detention against the
three human rights defenders and urges the Bahraini authority to immediately
investigate these.
 
The Observatory urges the Bahraini authorities to
drop all pending charges against Ms. Ebtisam Al-Saegh, Mr. Mohammed
Al-Shakhoori and Mr. Radhi Saleh Al-Qatari as they only aim at silencing their
peaceful and legitimate human rights activities. The Observatory urges also the
Bahraini authorities to immediately investigate the
above-mentioned allegations of torture and ill-treatment. 
 
Background
information:
 
On May 27, 2017, Ms. Al-Saegh, was summoned by the NSA to
Muharraq police station. She was released seven hours later and was immediately
taken to the hospital in a very concerning psychological state, following a
“severe nervous breakdown”. Upon her release, Ms. Al-Saegh reported having suffered
acts of torture, including severe beatings on the head, sexual abuse, insults
and threats if she continued her human rights work. NSA agents also threatened
to target her family members. According to reliable reports, she was also
forced to repeat the royal anthem and beaten and insulted when failed to do so
properly. During her interrogation, she was asked about the work of activists
inside and outside Bahrain, including in Geneva during sessions of the United
Nations (UN) Human Rights Council (HRC).
 
On May 28,
2017, the NSA called Mr. Radhi Saleh
Al-Qatari and summoned him to appear in their offices in Muharraq without
providing any reason. On the same day, he was moved to the Criminal
Investigation Department (CID) premises
for interrogation by the NSA and detained in Jaw Prison. Mr. Radhi Saleh
Al-Qatari was then only able to call his family every four days or more for a
couple of minutes. His family reported that he sounded exhausted over the
phone.
 
On June
20, 2017, Mr. Radhi Saleh Al-Qatari’s family filed a complaint before Bahrain’s
ombudsman to ask for the respect of his right to be visited by his lawyer and
family as well as to be informed of the charges pending against him. No
response was received. On July 10, 2017, his lawyer was informed that Mr. Radhi
Saleh Al-Qatari had been taken to the Prosecution of Terrorism Crimes on June
23, 2017, where he was not assisted by his lawyer.
 
On July 4, 2017, at approximatively
12.45 am, armed, masked and plain clothed officers from the NSA raided Ms.
Ebtisam Al-Saegh’s home and arrested her without any warrant. She was brought
to Isa Town women’s prison, where she was interrogated for long hours under
tough circumstances in order to force her to sign false confessions. During NSA
investigations Ms. Ebtisam Al-Saegh only signed confessions related to the
accusation of “communications with TV channels abroad”. Before the Prosecutor,
on July 18, 2017, she denied all charges and refused to sign any confessions.
 
She also reported being sent to the
Ministry of Interior’s clinic in Al Qaalaa, where she was diagnosed with low
blood pressure. Outside of interrogation hours, she was detained in solitary
confinement. At around 9 pm, she called her family from Isa Town women’s prison
to inform them of her whereabouts.
 
Following her arrest, Ms. Ebtisam
Al-Saegh was briefly seen by detainees in the morning of July 4, 2017, at the
Isa Town women’s prison visibly in poor physical conditions and appeared to
have been beaten before being taken away to an undisclosed location. 
 
At dawn on
July 4, 2017, Mr. Mohammed Al-Shakhoori was arrested at his home by masked,
plain clothed security forces who failed to present an arrest or search warrant
and to state where he was being taken to. Mr. Mohammed Al-Shakhoori was further
held at Dry Dock Detention Center although his whereabouts were not disclosed
until July 8, 2017. Mr. Al-Shakhoori’s family was only allowed to visit him on
August 7, and 15, 2017 and he was prevented from accessing his lawyers.
 
On July 12, 2017, Ms. Ebstisam
Al-Saegh launched a hunger strike to protest torture and ill-treatment by NSA
following her arrest. 
 
On July 16, 2017, Ms. Ebtisam
Al-Saegh, who was still being detained in solitary confinement at Isa Town
women’s Prison, was seen in an ambulance chair at the Qaala clinic, which is a
division of the Ministry of Interior, by fellow detained human rights defender
Nabeel Rajab[3]. On that
same day, only her husband could see her for a few minutes and reported that
she was in a wheelchair. She reported to him that during her detention at the
CID, she was stripped naked and sexually assaulted. 
 
In a joint statement on Ms. Ebtisam Al-Saegh, Mr.
Mohammed Al-Shakhoori and Mr. Radhi Saleh Al-Qatari published on July 18, 2017,
the Head of Manama’s Prosecution of Terrorist Crimes confirmed that the three
of them were being charged under Anti-Terrorism Law and ordered their detention
for a six-month period. Accordingly, an investigation has been initiated into
allegations of “organising and running an illegal group aiming at preventing
state institutions from carrying out their work”, “initiating attacks on the
individuals’ personal freedom” and “damaging national unity through means of
terrorism”. Although no specific group name has been mentioned, the authorities
has portrayed the group as receiving “gifts from those who work for the benefit
of a terrorist organization outside Bahrain to do terrorist acts against the
kingdom of Bahrain as well as collecting and giving money to a group practicing
terrorist activity”.
 
Ms. Ebtisam Al-Saegh was only
allowed to see her lawyer on July 18, 2017, when she was taken to the
Prosecutor’s office.
 
On August 1, 2017, she broke her
hunger strike when she was finally able to be visited by her family. 
 
On August
1, 2017, Mr. Radhi Saleh Al-Qatari was transferred to Dry Dock Detention
Center. Mr. Radhi Saleh Al-Qatari reported being tortured by electrocution,
including on the genitals, by the NSA who forced him to falsely confess on
charges of terrorism and receiving money from abroad. Furthermore, the NSA
threatened Mr. Radhi Saleh Al-Qatari to summon his father, wife and sisters if
he did not confess and incriminate Mr. Mohammed Al-Shakhoori and Ms. Ebtisam
Al-Saegh. Following leaks on Twitter about Mr. Radhi Saleh Al-Qatari
being tortured by the NSA, he was told by the NSA that he will be held longer.
 
Mr. Radhi
Saleh Al-Qatari’s family and lawyer had not been allowed to visit him, except a
visit by his family on August 8, 2017.
 
On August 14, 2017, Ms. Ebtisam
Al-Saegh started a second hunger strike which lasted four days, to protest the
constant insults and ill-treatment she has been subjected to since the
beginning of her detention by the police authorities and by Isa Town women’s
Prison staff, where she was held in solitary confinement. Furthermore, Ms.
Ebtisam Al-Saegh reported being detained in extremely precarious sanitary
conditions as she was forced to share dirty sanitary facilities, which are
consistently stained with blood and vomit, and the kitchen with co-detainees who
are contaminated with tuberculosis. During her detention, Ms. Ebtisam Al-Saegh
lost at least 12 kilos. She was in constant fear of catching a disease while in
prison and was reported to be very stressed by the sanitary conditions. Ms.
Ebtisam Al-Saegh was demanding to access her lawyer, whom she was only allowed
to see on July 18, 2017. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the
authorities in Bahrain, urging them to:
 
      
i.        
Put an end into all forms of
harassment, including at the judicial level, against Ms.
Ebtisam Al-Saegh, Mr. Mohammed Al-Shakhoori and Mr. Radhi Saleh Al-Qatari, as well as all detained
human rights defenders in Bahrain, so that they are able to carry out their legitimate
activities without
hindrance and fear of reprisals;
 
     
ii.        
Order an immediate, thorough, transparent,
effective and impartial investigation into the above-mentioned allegations of
torture, ill-treatment, and physical and psychological pressure against Ms. Ebtisam Al-Saegh, Mr. Mohammed
Al-Shakhoori and Mr. Radhi Saleh Al-Qatari by security agents in order to identify all those responsible, bring them
before an independent tribunal, and apply the sanctions provided by the law to
them;
 
    
iii.        
Comply with all the provisions of the United
Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular with its Articles
1, 5(b), and 12.2;
 
   
iv.        
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by Bahrain.

Addresses:
 
• Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of Bahrain, Fax: +973
176 64 587
• Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax : 00973
17 21 05 75; ofd@mofa.gov.bh
• Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and
Islamic Affairs, Fax: +973 175 31 284
• Lt. Gen. Cheikh Rashed bin Abdulla AL KHALIFA, Minister of
Interior, Email: info@interior.gov.bh
• H.E. Mr. Yusuf Abdulkarim Bucheeri, Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the
United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50. Email:
info@bahrain-mission.ch
• H.E. Ahmed Mohammed Yousif Aldoseri, Embassy of the Kingdom of Bahrain to the
Kingdom of Belgium, Fax: 0032 (0) 26472274; E-mail:
Brussels.mission@mofa.gov.bh
 
Please also write to the
diplomatic mission or embassy of Bahrain in your respective country.
 
***
 
Paris-Geneva, October 26,
2017
 
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The objective of this programme is to
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders
Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
To contact the
Observatory, call the emergency line:
·     E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·     Tel and fax
FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·     Tel and fax
OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1]                 Al Wefaq Directory of Rights and Freedoms monitors
and documents human rights violations in Bahrain and is part of the Bahrain
Human Rights Observatory. Mr. Al Shakhoori has also attended several sessions
of the UN Human Rights Council.


[2]                 The Manama Observatory for
Human Rights is part of Bahrain Human Rights Observatory. Mr. Al-Qatari has
faced travel bans on several occasions including for his participation to
several sessions of the UN Human Rights Council.


[3]                 See Observatory Urgent Appeal BHR 006 / 0812 / OBS 048.29, published
on July 10, 2017. 