Sri Lanka: Girissa De Silva loses use of both hands following torture
May 29, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / 2002 / MaySri Lanka: Girissa De Silva loses use of both hands following tortureCase LKA 290502 Arbitrary arrests and detention / Torture  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sri Lanka.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Asian Human Rights Commission that on March 22nd, 2002, 32-year old Girissa De Silva was arbitrarily arrested and subjected to torture while in detention at the Habaraduwa police station, following which he has lost the use of both of his hands, in Ahangama, Sri Lanka.    According to the information received, Mr. De Silva, the manager of the Green Garden Hotel in Katugoda, together with one of his relatives, Buddhika, was detained on March 22nd, 2002.  Both men were travelling in a three wheeler taxi, when officers from Habaraduwa police station arrested them and drove them to the police station.    According to the report, at the station, Mr. De Silva was interrogated concerning a murder that took place on March 9th, 2002.  He was told to tell the truth if he wanted to be “saved”, at which Mr. De Silva argued that on that date, he had been with a group of tourists at Nuwara-Eliya, and did not know anything about the case.  The Officer in Charge who had asked the questions, took Mr. De Silva to a barrack at Ahangama, where his clothes were forcibly removed and his hands were tied behind his back.  He was then hung from beams and beaten with wooden poles and “S-Lon” pipes by O.I.C. Satisgamage, S. I. Ariyaratne, S.I. Lekamvasam, Sergeant Chandra Soma and several other plainclothes officers.  This procedure was repeated five times, and he was also reportedly suspended by his fingers.  When he asked for water, the officers refused, saying that he would be given water when he told the truth.  Mr. De Silva was later brought back to the Habaraduwa police station, by that time Buddhika had already been released.  Mr. De Silva’s hands were numb from the torture, and he was not even able to grab food with them.  Sympathetic officers at the station reportedly told Buddhika that Mr. De Silva had been tortured on “orders from above”.  Mr. De Silva was released at noon on March 23rd, 2002.  According to the information received, Mr. De Silva stayed in hospital from March 23rd to April 11th, 2002.  Professor Niriella, a well-known forensic specialist, concluded after an examination that it was unlikely that he would recover the use of his hands.  Mr. De Silva has filed a complaint at the Galle police station.   The International Secretariat of OMCT is deeply concerned by the Sri Lankan authorities arbitrary arrests and subsequent use of torture on Girissa De Silva while he was in detention, as a result of which he has now lost the use of both of his hands.  OMCT fears that the perpetrators of this attack will continue to enjoy impunity and that Mr. De Silva will not be granted adequate reparation, including appropriate medical assistance.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Sri Lanka urging them to:  ·	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  ·	guarantee adequate reparation to Girissa De Silva;  ·	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	Her Excellency President Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga, President's House, Colombo 3, Sri Lanka. Fax No 00 94 1 333703, E-mails: for_min@sri.lanka.net  ·	Prime Minister Honorable Ranil Wickremasinghe, 58 Sir Earnest de Silva Mawatha, Colombo 7. Sri Lanka. Fax No 00 94 1575454  ·	Honorable Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, 37, Kirula Place, Colombo 5. Sri Lanka. Fax No 00 94 1 437680  ·	Hon. Ambassador, Permanent Mission and Consulate General of Sri Lanka, 56, Rue De Moillebeau, 5th Floor, 1 209, Geneva 19, Switzerland, Fax: (41-22) 734 9084, E-mail: mission.srilanka@itu.ch  ·	Hon. High-Commissioner, The High Commission of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 13 Hyde Park Gardens London W2 2LU United Kingdom Fax: 0044 207 262-7970  Please also write to the embassies of Sri Lanka in your respective country.  Geneva, May 29th, 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 