Cambodia to be reviewed by UN Human Rights Committee
March 16, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / 2015 / MarchCambodia to be reviewed by UN Human Rights CommitteeJOINT PRESS RELEASEThe World Organization against Torture and the Cambodian Center for Human Rights call on the UN body to denounce Cambodia's treatment of Human Rights DefendersGeneva 16 March 2015 - The World Organization against Torture (OMCT) and its
member organisation the Cambodian Center for Human Rights (CCHR) presented
their joint alternative report to the UN Human Rights Committee. During its 113th
session, held from 16th March to 2nd April 2015, the
Human Rights Committee will review Cambodia’s second periodic report on 17th
and 18th March.
On the eve of the examination
of Cambodia by the Human Rights Committee, OMCT and CCHR have presented additional
information to the Committee members about the country’s human rights record.
CCHR and OMCT expressed grave concerns over
the crackdown on human rights defenders, trade unionists and journalists. 
Serious human rights
violations, including excessive use of force and ill-treatment by the security
forces leading to the deaths of demonstrators and bystanders in 2013 and 2014,
have been met with impunity. Fundamental freedoms, including freedoms of
expression and assembly, continue to be subjected to undue restrictions, and
human rights defenders, journalists and trade union activists are regularly
harassed and prevented from carrying out their essential role in strengthening
democracy in the country. 
Repeatedly, land rights defenders
are threatened and harassed by powerful private actors, such as companies
involved in industrial agriculture projects, as a result of land disputes often
involving land grabs and forced evictions. Judicial harassment through the
misuse of criminal charges and the abuse of provisional detention remained
common in 2014.
During the closed meeting with
the Human Rights Committee, CCHR and OMCT urged the Committee to call on
Cambodia:
To ensure prompt, thorough, and effective investigations
into all reports of excessive use of force and ill-treatment by law
enforcement officials and private security guards involved in the policing
of demonstrations and make the results public;
To
immediately and unconditionally release those arbitrarily detained for
politically-motivated charges or convictions, including human rights defenders;
 To amend
the draft electoral laws that unduly restrict the freedom of expression of
civil society organizations during election periods;
To amend
the draft law on Associations and NGOs (LANGO), which contains mandatory and
complex registration requirements for all civil society organizations,
excessive restrictions on foreign NGOs and vague terminology that would enable
the government to delay indefinitely or deny the registration of NGOs; 
To repeal or amend the
recently passed Law on Organization and Functioning of the Courts and
Prosecutions, the Law on Amendment of the Supreme Council of Magistracy, and
the Law on Statute of Judges and Prosecutors, to strengthen the independence of
the judiciary.
The Human
Rights Committee’s review of Cambodia will take place over two days, starting
on 17th March at 3pm local time and beginning again on 18th
March at 10am local time in Geneva, Switzerland. The review can be followed
live on: www.treatybodywebcast.org.
For further information please
contact:
CCHR, Ms. Sopheap Chak, Executive Director, Tel. +855 (0) 11 943 213,
Email: chaksopheap@cchrcambodia.org
OMCT, Ms. Nicole Buerli, Human Rights Advisor,
Tel. +41 (0) 22 809 49 26, Email: nb@omct.org 