Kyrgyzstan:  Postponment of the trial against Mr. Azimjan Askarov
December  1, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2011 / DecemberKyrgyzstan: Postponment of the trial against Mr. Azimjan Askarov

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
 
New information
KGZ 001 / 0910 / OBS 109.4
Judicial harassment / 
Ongoing arbitrary detention
Kyrgyzstan
December 1, 2011
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests 
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Kyrgyzstan.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the 
postponment of the trial against Mr. Azimjan Askarov, a well-known ethnic Uzbek defender and Director of the human rights 
organisation “Vozdukh” (Air), which has been documenting police ill-treatment of 
detainees and monitoring the human rights situation in the province of 
Jalal-Abad, in particular the violent events in Bazar Korgon in June 2010.  
 
According to the information received, the trial against Mr. Azimjan Askarov, which was scheduled to resume 
before the Supreme Court of Bishkek on November 29, 2011, was postponed to 
December 20, 2011. Meanwhile, Mr. Askarov remains arbitrarily detained in prison 
colony 47 in Bishkek (see background information).
 
Mr. Askarov was found guilty of killing a policeman during violent 
clashes between Kyrgyz and Uzbeks in the south of Kyrgyzstan, following an 
unfair and politically motivated trial.
 
The Observatory considers that the whole judicial case against Mr. 
Azimjan Askarov merely aims at sanctioning his human rights activities, and 
calls for the respect of fair trial standards in the course of the next hearings 
before the Supreme Court.
 
The Observatory also remains deeply concerned with the continuing 
arbitrary detention of Mr. Azimjan Askarov, and calls for his immediate and 
unconditional release.
 
The Observatory more generally reiterates its call for the full 
respect of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in 
accordance with the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of 
Prisoners.
 
Background information:
 
On June 15, 2010, Mr. Askarov was arrested by agents of Bazar Korgon 
police department for allegedly having urged ethnic Uzbeks, along with other 
leaders of the Uzbek community, to take as an hostage the district official Mr. 
A. Artykov, for having ordered the blockade of the Bishkek-Osh Highway along 
with 500 armed protesters, and having attacked police officers causing the death 
of one of them, Mr. Sulaimanov. 
 
On September 15, 2010, Mr. Askarov was sentenced to life imprisonment 
after he was found guilty of killing a policeman following an unfair trial. 
Other ethnic Uzbeks were also sentenced to long-term imprisonment. 
 
Mr. Askarov and the other defendants had pleaded not guilty during 
the trial. His lawyer, Mr. Nurbek Toktakunov, asked for a medical examination, 
which was denied. According to family members of the suspects and human rights 
organisations, all of them were subjected to acts of torture and ill-treatment 
by prison guards during custody and presented visible physical injuries. 

 
On November 3 and 4, 2010, hearings in the trial in appeal against 
Mr. Askarov were held at Tash Kumyr City Court in Nooken, a place which is 
closer to the residence of relatives of the police officer murdered. On November 
10, 2010, the court of appeal upheld the life sentence of Mr. 
Azimjan Askarov following a trial marked by irregularities. At that time the health 
of Mr. Askarov had severely deteriorated.
 
On January 26, 2011, the defence lawyers requested the Court to 
examine and include new evidence in the criminal case, including a testimony 
made by Ms. Aziza Abdirasulova, Director of the human rights organisation Kylym 
Shamy, that showed that, in May 2010, Mr. Azimjan Askarov had warned the 
authorities that acts of violence were being prepared in Bazar Korgon. According 
to Mr. Azimjan Askarov's lawyer Nurbek Toktakunov, this warning might have 
triggered the fabrication of this case. In addition, defence lawyer Kairat 
Zagibaev provided evidence showing that Mr. Askarov was not present at the scene 
where the incidents took place. The Supreme Court accepted the new evidence and 
suspended the hearing until February 8, 2011 for their examination.
 
On February 8, 2011, the Supreme Court of Bishkek decided to open an 
investigation on the conditions of detention in Kyrgyzstan, especially in 
provisional detention centres, and to suspend sine die the trial against Mr. Askarov. This decision was taken following a petition made by Mr. Nurbek 
Toktakunov, lawyer of Mr. Askarov, on the appalling conditions of detention of 
his client and other prisoners in the temporary detention facilities of Bazar 
Korgon, which have hampered the preparation of the defence. 
 
Mr. Askarov has remained in detention in prison colony 47 in Bishkek 
since then.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Kyrgyzstan, urging them to: 

 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological 
integrity of Mr. Azimjan Askarov as well as of all human rights defenders in the 
Kyrgyzstan;
 
ii. Ensure the immediate and unconditional release of Mr. Azimjan 
Askarov since his detention is arbitrary as it only aims at sanctioning his 
human rights activities; 
 
iii. Meanwhile, ensure that Mr. Azimjan Askarov be provided decent conditions of detention;
 
iv. Put an end to any act of harassment - including at the judicial 
level - against Mr. Askarov, as well as against all human rights defenders in 
Kyrgyzstan, and ensure in all circumstances that they are able to carry out 
their legitimate activities without any hindrance and fear of reprisals; 

 
v. Comply with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on 
Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, 
especially:
-  Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually or 
in association with others, to promote the protection and realization of human 
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international 
levels”,
-  and Article 12.2 which provides that “the State shall take all 
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of 
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, 
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or 
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of 
the rights referred to in the present Declaration”; 
 
vi. More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human 
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments 
ratified by the Kyrgyzstan.  
 
Addresses:  
·     Ms. Rosa OTUNBAEVA, President of the Kyrgyz Republic, Fax: + 
996312626191
·     Colonel Zarylbek RYSALIEV, Minister of Internal Affairs, Fax: + 
996312682044 / + 996312623853
·     Mr. A. Mukhamedzhanovu, Minister of Justice, Phone number: 
+996312661734
·     Ms. Aida SALYANOVA, Public Prosecutor of the Kyrgyz of Republic, Fax: 
+ 996312656511
·     Permanent Mission of Kyrgyzstan to the United Nations Office and other international organizations 
in Geneva, Rue Maunoir 26, 1207 Geneva, Switzerland, Email: kyrgyzmission@bluewin.ch, Fax: +41 22 707.92.21
·     Embassy of Kyrgyzstan in Brussels, 47 rue de l’Abbaye, 1050 
Bruxelles, Belgium, Tel: + 32 2 640 18 68 / + 32 2 640 38 83, Fax: + 32 2 640 01 
31, Email: aitmatov@infonie.be 
 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of Kyrgyzstan in your 
respective countries.
 
*** Paris-Geneva, December 1, 2011 
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this 
appeal in your reply.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.orgTel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 
80Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 
29 