Iran:  Ms. Mansoureh Behkish sentenced to imprisonment on appeal
July 11, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2012 / JulyIran: Ms. Mansoureh Behkish sentenced to imprisonment on appeal

THE
OBSERVATORY - PRESS RELEASE

 
IRAN: Supporter of
“Mourning Mothers”, Ms. Mansoureh Behkish sentenced to imprisonment on appeal
 
Paris-Geneva,
July 11, 2012. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), was informed of the
appeals ruling issued against of human rights defender Ms. Mansoureh Behkish.
 
On July 5, 2012, Ms. Mansoureh Behkish, a
supporter of the “Mothers of Park Laleh” (the “Mourning Mothers” of Iran)[1], also known for fighting against the death penalty, received the text
of the Appeals Court’s ruling regarding her appeal against the first instance
sentence.
 
Ms. Behkish had been sentenced on December 25, 2011 to four years and
six months of imprisonment by Branch 15 of the Islamic Revolution Court: four
years on charges of “assembly and collusion against national security through
the establishment of the Mourning Mothers” and six months on charges of “spreading
propaganda against the system”. 
 
The appeals court has now combined the two parts of her sentence. As a
result, her 6-month imprisonment term has been included in the four-year
imprisonment sentence. The appeals court has also suspended three years and six
months of the sentence for a period of 5 years, which means she will have to
serve those 3.5 years in addition to any new sentence, if convicted on similar
charges over the next 5 years. 
 
Consequently, Ms. Behkish is now facing a six-month custodial
imprisonment sentence and is at risk of being arrested any time. 
 
The Observatory recalls that on June 12, 2011, Ms. Mansoureh Behkish
was arrested by a group of security agents in a street of Tehran. She was
released on bail on July 9, 2011. Ms. Behkish has been subjected to
interrogations and arbitrary detentions in the past as a result of her human
rights activities. She had previously been arrested on August 29, 2008,
December 5, 2009 and then on January 9, 2010 together with more than 30 women supporters
of the “Mothers of Park Laleh”. On March 17, 2010, she was prevented from
travelling to Italy to visit her children and her passport was confiscated. She
was then banned from travelling abroad. Ms. Behkish lost six members of her
family during the executions and prison massacres that took place in the 1980s
and has consistently come under great pressure not to visit their graves or
otherwise commemorate them. 
 
The Observatory believes that the sentence against
Ms. Ms. Mansoureh Behkish merely aims at intimidating her and impeding her from carrying out her human rights activities. More generally, it also aims at intimidating all human rights defenders in Iran. 
 
The Observatory therefore urges the Iranian authorities to
immediately and unconditionally put an end to the judicial harassment of and
drop all the charges against Ms. Ms. Mansoureh Behkish and release all human
rights defenders arbitrarily detained, and more generally to conform to the
United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and international human rights instruments ratified by Iran.
 
For
further information, please contact:
·        
FIDH: Arthur Manet : +
33 1 43 55 25 18
·       
OMCT: Isabelle Scherer : + 41 22 809 49 39



[1]              The “Mourning Mothers” (“Madaran-e
Azardar”) are women whose family members were killed, executed, detained or
disappeared in the context of political violence since 1981. They call for the
acknowledgement of secret political executions in the past three decades and
disclosure of burial places of the victims. In the aftermath of the
post-election violence in June 2009, they organised silent public protests each
Saturday evening in Tehran's Laleh Park, calling for the release of all
political prisoners and abolition of the death penalty. 