Greece:  Ongoing arbitrary restriction to freedom of movement of minority rights defender Slavko Mangovski
March  6, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Greece / 2019 / MarchGreece: Ongoing arbitrary restriction to freedom of movement of minority rights defender Slavko Mangovski
 CASE GRE 181116.1
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS

Restrictions to freedom of movement /
Entry
ban / Arbitrary detention
 
The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Greece.
 
New information:
  
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Greek
Helsinki Monitor (GHM) about the ongoing arbitrary restriction to freedom of
movement of Mr. Slavko Mangovski, Macedonian
minority activist who has been for years cooperating also with GHM.
 
According to the information received, on March 2, 2019, Mr. Mangovski was
denied entry into Greece under the argument that an alert refusing entry in the
country has been issued against him in the national register. Mr. Mangovski's
attempt to enter Greece followed the reception of a letter from the Greek
Ombudsman, dated  October 15, 2018 but
received only in mid February 2019, in which the Ombudsman informed him that he
was not listed into the list of undesirable third country nationals kept at the
Greek Police Headquarters in Athens. The involvement of the Greek Ombudsman
follows a complaint filed in May 2018 by the GHM on behalf of Mr. Mangovski as
well as Ms. Trendafilka
Sandeva, a lawyer with long-term cooperation with GHM on
human rights issues who's also facing an entry ban, as well as a second
complaint filed by Mr. Mangovski in October 2018.
 
OMCT recalls that this is not the first attack against Mr. Slavko
Mangovski (see background information) and highlights that the situation of
human rights defenders and solidarity actors in Greece has been critical for
years. Human rights defenders working on migrants' and minority rights are
consistently targeted for their legitimate work and face different types of
attacks, including surveillance, arbitrary arrests, detentions, ill-treatment,
entry bans and expulsion[1]. At the same time, several
complaints related to racism and minority’s rights have not been investigated
and/or have been sent to the “archive of unknown perpetrators[2]. OMCT is particularly
concerned by the continued increasing of violent attacks and threats against
minority rights defenders in Greece[3].
 
OMCT condemns the use of entry bans against defenders and journalists
working on the rights of minorities on the ground of posing threats to national
security, which appears only to be aimed at sanctioning their legitimate human
rights activities. OMCT urges the Greek authorities including the Greek
Ombudsman to promptly and efficiently investigate the allegations as well
as to ensure a due process including by providing all relevant documents that
would allegedly justify an entry ban against Mr. Mangovski and Ms. Sandeva.
Finally, we urge the Greek authorities to immediately and
unconditionally lift such bans and more generally to put an end to all acts of
harassment against all migrants and minority rights defenders in Greece. 
 
Background information:
 
On August 11, 2000, a ban preventing him from entering Greece was issued
against Mr. Mangovski. Such decision was lifted two days after GHM intervened
before the Greek authorities on his behalf. 
 
On October 24, 2016, Mr. Mangovski was travelling from Macedonia to
Greece in order to meet with Macedonian minority activists. At the
Niki/Medzitlija Macedonian-Greek border crossing, he was denied entrance to
Greece and informed that he was, since June 4, 2013, listed on the national
registry of persons not allowed entering the Greek territory. The authorities
provided him with a copy of the official document pronouncing his ban; it was
the first time Mr. Mangovski learned about the existence of such ban against
him, which prevented him from being able to use in a timely manner the
available legal remedy to contest such measure soon after it was imposed.
Moreover, he was given no explanation either about the grounds of the ban or
the length of the measure. 
 
The International Secretariat of OMCT is concerned that the ongoing ban
could be linked to Mr. Mangovski’s participation as a speaker to the joint Macedonian
Human Rights Movement International (MHRMI) and
Association of Refugee Children from Aegean Macedonia (ARCAM) Gala Banquet on
June 1, 2013, in Toronto, commemorating the 65th anniversary of the plight of
the Detsa Begaltsi (Macedonian minority Children Refugees from the Greek Civil
War).
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Greece, urging them to:
 
      
i.        
Guarantee the freedom
of movement of Mr. Slavko Mangovski and Ms. Trandaflika Sandeva, by immediately
and unconditionally lifting the prohibition to enter the country which was
issued against them, as it seems to only aim at sanctioning their legitimate
human rights activities;
 
    
ii.        
Promptly
and efficiently investigate these acts of harassment against including any
potential individual responsibilities within the Greek administration, as well
as to ensure a due process including by providing all relevant documents that
would allegedly justify an entry ban against them;
 
   
iii.        
Put an end to all acts
of harassment against Mr. Mangovski and Ms. Sandeva,
as well as against all minority rights defenders in Greece, so that they are
able to carry out their work without hindrance or fear of reprisals;
 
   
iii.        
Conform with the
provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the
General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially Articles
1 and 12.2; and
 
   
iv.        
More generally, ensure
in all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with
international and regional human rights instruments ratified by Greece.
 
 
Addresses:
 
·      
 Prime Minister of Greece, Mr. Alexis Tsipras,
Email: mail@primeminister.gr
·      
Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Professor George Katrougkalos, grypex@mfa.gr  dgypex@mfa.gr
·      
Minister of Justice Mr. Michalis Kalogirou
Email: grammateia@justice.gov.gr
·      
Minister for Citizens Protection of Greece, Ms.
Olga Gerovasili, Email: minister@mopocp.gov.gr  
·      
General Secretary for Transparency and Human
Rights, Ms. Maria Yannakaki, Fax: Email: ggdad@justice.gov.gr
·      
Permanent Representative of Greece, Ms. Anna
Korka, Permanent Mission of Greece to the United Nations in Geneva,
Switzerland, Email: grdel.gva@mfa.gr
·      
Ambassador of Greece, H.E. Eleftheria
Galathianaki, Embassy of Greece in Brussels, Belgium,  Email: gremb.bru@mfa.gr
·      
Permanent Representative of Greece, H.E.
Papastavrou Andreas, Permanent Representation to the European Union (EU), 
Email: mea.bruxelles@rp-greece.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or
embassy of Greece in your respective country.
 
***
 
Geneva-Brussels, March 6, 2019
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.
 
 
Created in 1985, the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) is the main coalition of non-governmental organisations
(NGO) fighting against torture, summary executions, enforced disappearances and
all other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, as well as for the protection
of human rights defenders. With more than 200 affiliated organisations in its
SOS-Torture Network, OMCT aims at accompanying, reinforcing and
protecting anti-torture organisations in particular in erosive environments and
provides a comprehensive system of support and protection for human rights
defenders around the world.


 



[1]           See OMCT’s "Written Submission to the 35th Session of the United Nations Human
Rights Council on the situation of minority rights defenders”, issued on February 21, 2018.


[2]           See OMCT’s Urgent appeal “Greece:
Impunity regarding the attacks perpetrated in December 2016 against minority
rights defenders“, issued on February 21, 2018


[3]           See
the Observatory (OMCT-FIDH), Urgent Appeal
on the break-in and arson attack of the Afghan Community Centre’s premises in
Athens and the threats targeting the Hellenic League for Human Rights (HLHR), GRE 001 / 0318 / OBS 036, published on
March 30, 2018. 