Philippines:  UN Human Rights Committee review revealed “several areas of deficit” in the Philippine human rights records
October 17, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / Philippines / 2012 / OctoberPhilippines: UN Human Rights Committee review revealed “several areas of deficit” in the Philippine human rights records 
Geneva 15 – 16 October 2012. 
The United Nations Human Rights Committee concluded the examination of the
fourth periodic report of the Philippines on the implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (ICCPR). This review took place on 15 and 16 October 2012
in Geneva and was attended by a dozen Civil Society Organisations (CSO) from
the Philippines that submitted several reports.
 
On October 16, the
Chair of the Human Rights Committee, Zonke Majodina, concluded the dialogue on
the state of human rights in the Philippines. She referred to positive
developments that took place since the previous examination in 2003, including
the recent adoption of the Framework Agreement between the Government and the
Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) and
the 2009 anti-torture act.
 
The Human Rights Committee remained
concerned about many difficulties faced by the State. The Chair noted “several
areas of deficit” in the implementation of the ICCPR. She expressed the need
for clarification on the status of the ICCPR in domestic law, whether it was
regarded as binding or only persuasive authority, and she expressed concern
about the absence of existing measures to implement the Committee’s views under
its individual communications procedure.
 
The Committee noted the continuing occurrence of extra-judicial
killings and the high rate of enforced disappearances; the poor results of investigations and the lack of
prosecution, including the slow progress in the 2009 Ampatuan massacre. The
Committee is concerned about the role of the private armed and the military auxiliary groups as well as the high number of loose weapons in circulation in
the country.
 
In addition, the Committee is alarmed by
the problem of overcrowding in prisons in Philippines, a matter that was
already raised by the Committee during the last review, but which has not been
addressed to-date. With regard to torture, the Government did not provide any
statistics to substantiate its claim that torture is not prevalent.
 
With regard to women’s rights, the
Chairperson said the Committee is deeply concerned about the “sharia laws and
their impact on women”. The Committee was also alarmed that reproductive rights
are still not guaranteed, that access to contraception is highly restricted,
and that abortion without exception is criminalized. According to the State
Delegation, the maternal mortality ratio has increased by a quarter from 2006
and 2010.
 
The Committee welcomed the landmark Ang Ladlad ruling
of the Supreme Court that allowed an LGBT party to participate in the election
but stressed that more needs to be done due to the continuing absence of
anti-discrimination legislation, presence of a vague public scandal law, and
anti-LGBT prejudice by military and election officials.  The State delegation responded by noting
persistent, “prejudices against LGBTs.”
 
The Human
Rights Committee will make its recommendations public at the end of its
session, on 1st November 2012.
 
Background information:
The
archived webcast of the Philippines review can be seen at treatybodywebcast.org.
NGO reports on the Philippines4th State Report on Philippines
 
Contacts
in Philippines:
-      
Rose Trajano – PAHRA – pahra@philippinehumanrights.org
-      
Ricardo Sunga – TFDP - tfdp1974@gmail.com
-        
Ging Cristobal – IGLHRC – gcristobal@iglhrc.org
-        
Jonas Bagas – TLF Share – jonasbagas@gmail.com 
-        
Marie Hilao-Enriquez – KARAPATAN – karapatan.pid2@gmail.com
 
 
Contacts in Geneva:
-        
Seynabou Benga – OMCT- sb@omct.org
-        
Stuart Halford - Center for Reproductive
Rights & SRI  - stuart.geneva@sri-crr.org 
-        
Asger Kjaerum – IRCT – akj@irct.org
-        
Patrick Mutzenberg – CCPR-Centre – pmutzenberg@ccprcentre.org 