Oman:  Case against “Azamn” journalists must be overturned on appeal
November 10, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Oman / 2016 / NovemberOman: Case against “Azamn” journalists must be overturned on appealOman_Joint statement_ARABIC VERSION2 pages / 3.59 MB

On
7 November 2016, the Omani Appeal Court in Muscat heard the case against three
journalists of “Azamn” newspaper, Ibrahim Al-Maamari, Yousef Al-Haj,
and Zaher Al-Abri, and judgment
will be handed down on 17 November 2016. A
coalition of rights groups which monitored the trial called for the sentences
to be overturned and the charges to be dropped. 
The
coalition is composed of the Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR), the Arabic Network for Human
Rights Information (ANHRI), Front Line Defenders, Reporters Without Borders
(RSF), FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) within the framework of the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders.
 
The coalition’s lawyer who observed the appeal hearing,
presided over by Judge Mukhtar Al-Harthi, on 7 November, said: “The defence team faced significant procedural
obstacles in the Appeal Court re-trial today, ranging from a refusal by
Judges to call relevant witnesses of fact, denial of disclosure and a basic
failure to place the criminal burden of proof on the Prosecution. This has led
to a trial of all three defendants, on a cumulative 14 charges, being completed
in just two morning sessions.”
 
He noted that the substantive laws under which
journalists Al-Maamari and Al-Haj are being prosecuted, including charges of
“disturbing public order,” “undermining the prestige of the state” and criminal
defamation, are ill-defined, arbitrarily enforced and constitute a
disproportionate interference with freedom of expression.  They were
effectively denied a “public interest” defence. 
 
It is of particular concern that Al-Maamari and Al-Haj
were held in solitary confinement in a police intelligence facility for 60 days
over the summer with access to their lawyer only after the first trial had
begun. Al-Abri, charged under Article 19 of Oman’s Cyber-Crime law, faces a
year in jail for two tweets commenting on his colleagues’ detention. Al-Abri
was held for 20 days. 
 
“Azamn”, once Oman’s leading independent newspaper,
remains closed by Order of the Ministry of Information. The
arrests of the journalists and the closure of the newspaper came after a
report, published on 26 July 2016, entitled "Supreme bodies tie the hands
of justice," which referred to the corruption of senior officials and
their interference in judicial decisions.
 
If the decision of the lower Court is upheld by the
Appeal Court on 17 November, Al-Maamari and Al-Haj face three years in jail for
publishing articles alleging corruption in the senior judiciary.
 
On
26 September 2016, the Court of First Instance sentenced Al-Maamari and Al-Haj
to three years in prison and Al-Abri to one year, in addition to ordering the
permanent closure of the Azamn newspaper on charges related to the
publication of a story about judicial corruption. See: http://www.gc4hr.org/news/view/1382
 
On
10 October 2016, during the first appeal hearing in the “Azamn” case, Judge Al-Harthi
reduced the bail for Al-Maamari and Al-Haj from 50,000 OMR (approx.
USD$130,000) to 2,000 OMR (approx. USD$5200). The two journalists were then
freed. Al-Abri had already been conditionally freed on 22 August. See a
previous joint appeal at: https://rsf.org/en/news/rsf-condemns-omani-judicial-persecution-independent-daily
 
During
the first hearing, the court banned the publication and circulation of the
details of the hearing in all forms of media.
 
The
Coalition reiterates its call for the authorities in Oman to:
·     
Revoke the sentences issued
against journalists Ibrahim Al-Maamari, Yousef Al-Haj and Zaher Al-Abri;
·     
Revoke the closure order of
"Azamn" newspaper by the Ministry of Information; and
·      Guarantee
in all circumstances that all human rights defenders including journalists,
writers and online activists in Oman are able to carry out their legitimate
human rights activities without fear of reprisals and free of all restrictions
including judicial harassment. 