"Closing the gap: setting an agenda for eradication" : remarks by the OMCT SG on the occasion of the 30th anniversary of the Convention against Torture
November  5, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / 2014 / November"Closing the gap: setting an agenda for eradication" : remarks by the OMCT SG on the occasion of the 30th anniversary of the Convention against TortureOMCT_30th anniversary_UNCAT6 pages / 433 KB
Press Release
OMCT calls for support to civil society as key
condition for bringing the Convention against Torture home
Geneva, 4 November 2014Addressing the commemoration by the United Nations of the 30th
anniversary of the UN Convention Against Torture the OMCT calls for increased
civil society support as core component of an agenda to eradicate torture.
‘The
implementation gap remains today the number one challenge in the fight against
torture’, as Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of OMCT noted at the
outset of his remarks. ‘It is time for all
of us to build a comprehensive response to torture that ensures that those
responsible are held accountable, and that ensure real culture change in law enforcement,
security services and the judiciary’.
Gerald Staberock set out the fundamental role of civil
society. Without a constituency for reform and organizations that can document
and report on torture free of threats, that can provide vital victim assistance
seeking justice and providing the expertise for legal and policy reforms to
prevent torture it will be impossible to make progress. The emergence of
partner organisations around the globe is the single most important element of
hope for the coming future in implementing the Convention against torture.
‘States have to
ensure as a baseline that working on torture is not a high-risk area’, he
noted commenting on the many threats faced by members of the global SOS-Torture
Network of the OMCT. ‘Defenders around
the world working on torture face threats, intimidation and harassment. We have
to pay tribute to those courageous individuals. The impediment to their work
has to stop.’
The presentation outlines key elements to make the
work of the Committee against Torture more accessible, visible and having real
impact in the societies concerned. 
‘We have a
responsibility to ensure that the deliberations on torture here in Geneva
before the Committee against Torture are taken seriously, made visible and known
in the countries concerned, so that the Committee’s recommendations are a real tool
for change’, he resumed.
For the full speech, please see the attached document. 