Saudi Arabia:  Condemned to silence: the situation of women human rights defenders in Saudi Arabia
January 17, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Saudi Arabia / 2018 / JanuarySaudi Arabia: Condemned to silence: the situation of women human rights defenders in Saudi Arabia





Publication of a report
 
Paris-Geneva,
January 17, 2018 - The report being
released today by the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
(an FIDH-OMCT partnership) is a far cry from the media frenzy that was caused
by the announcement of symbolic reforms, such as that set out in the September
2017 Royal Decree (at last) giving Saudi women permission to drive. This report
casts a harsh light on the scandalous situation of Saudi women human rights
defenders who still have to cope with major restrictions to their rights. As
women, they are subjected to a patriarchal regime that is steeped in gender
inequality, and they must cope with a context that severely represses all
voices of dissent. Women who report domestic violence or stand up as activists
are confronted with unrelenting repression. Since they are not allowed to form
movements or associations, they take refuge in social networks. 
 
Saudi Arabia is well known for the severe limits it imposes on women's
rights – the legal status of the woman being inferior to that of the
man – in all fields, even in the simplest acts of daily life.
Nonetheless, because of the economic necessity to end total dependence on oil,
and because of the aspirations of young people who are taking over much of the
social media, the authorities have announced that they would gradually make
some concessions.
 
Yet, since 2016, the country has been experiencing unprecedented
mobilisation by women standing up for their most basic rights, especially since
they can now do it through social networks. There are now thousands of
cyber-activists on the networks, most of them using accounts anonymously out of
fear of reprisal.
 
Although in recent years the government has given indications of more
openness, especially since the arrival of a ‘new generation’ of leaders,
represented by the Crown Prince Mohammad Bin Salman, women are still exposed to
a double vulnerability. 
 
One is their status. The maintenance of the ‘male guardian’ status
perpetuates gender inequality and condemns women to a minority status for their
whole life. The Royal Circular of April 18, 2017 reforming this status raised
great hope among women defenders, but little has changed. Women still must have
the authorisation from a male guardian to travel abroad or to obtain a
passport. And some women fear that nothing will ever change. Going beyond the
texts, which are often unclear, the police and legal authorities can be
especially brutal and discriminating, especially in the case of domestic
violence.
 
The other area concerns the promises of the Saudi authorities to
introduce reforms, which is still countered by the reality of the situation of
human rights in a country that continues to repress all dissenting views,
especially those of human rights defenders who are calling for far-reaching
societal reforms. 
 
The law still does not guarantee respect for basic rights such as
freedoms of association, expression and peaceful assembly. Any attempt to set
up a movement or an association is brutally crushed. Saudi law is not only rife
with vague concepts that leave great leeway for the judges, but the laws meant
to fight criminality and terrorism are deflected to criminalise the legal
expression of any dissenting opinion. Dozens of defenders, bloggers, lawyers,
and activists have been accused of ‘apostasy’, ‘atheism’, ‘insulting religion’,
‘terrorism’, ‘destabilising the State’, ‘attempting to influence public
opinion’, or even ‘creating an illegal organisation’, and are now spending long
years in prison.
 
The report that the Observatory is publishing today speaks of the fight
for the emancipation of women in Saudi Arabia in a tightly circumscribed human
rights environment. 
 
It traces the symbolic path of some of them. Most of them are
cyber-activists who use social networks anonymously in order to denounce all
the arbitrary treatment they must deal with. There are also activists who
publicly announce their position as human rights defenders and become involved
with emblematic causes like putting an end to male guardianship, or with the
possibility of setting up an association for the defense of women’s rights or,
more broadly, human rights, or running in the municipal elections. All of them
are taking risks and are very vulnerable.
 
In November 2017, blogger Naimah Al-Matrod was sentenced to six
years in prison for participating in a peaceful protest movement in the eastern
coastal part of the country about economic, social and political claims, and
for having called for the release of political prisoners and for democratic
reforms. 
 
All these women are already subjected to pressure from their families and
are now forced into a silence imposed by the government. They may be threatened
with prosecution, arbitrarily arrested, put in prison, banned from travel and
forbidden to speak in public. Following the opening of legal proceedings, most
of them see the sword of Damocles hanging over their head for several years in
order to keep them silent.
 
The report
is available in French, English and Arabic.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European
Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil
society.
 
Press
contacts:
FIDH: Samuel Hanryon: +33 6 72
     28 42 94 / Audrey Couprie : +33 6 48 05 91 57OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39 