Azerbaijan:  Joint Statement: Stop Crackdown on Freedom of Expression
December  6, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2016 / DecemberAzerbaijan: Joint Statement: Stop Crackdown on Freedom of Expression

 
6 December 2016  
 
The government of
Azerbaijan is carrying out a multi-pronged attack on freedom of expression,
including introducing harsh penalties for critical speech online, imprisoning
young activists for nothing more than graffiti, blocking access to websites of
independent media, and harassing and violating the rights of journalists and
activists. The undersigned organisations call upon the Azerbaijani authorities
to reverse this alarming trend and respect basic human rights and freedoms, as
well as for international partners to ensure Azerbaijan honours its treaty
commitments as a state party to the European Convention on Human Rights and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
 
Earlier this year,
two young activists from the N!DA youth movement, Bayram Mammadov and Qiyas
Ibrahimov, were arrested after spraypainting graffiti on a monument to Heydar
Aliyev in Baku. They were arrested on spurious drug charges and allegedly
tortured repeatedly in police custody. Ibrahimov was recently sentenced to ten years
imprisonment in what the head of the country’s press freedom watchdog Institute
for Reporters’ Freedom and Safety Emin Huseynov rightfully called, “a prime
example of travesty of justice in Azerbaijan.”. Mammadov, whose trial is
underway, will most likely face the same fate as last Friday the prosecution
requested a 10 years and 6 months imprisonment for him.
 
In Sumqayit, the
journalist Ikram Rahimov and a private citizen Rahman Novruzov were sentenced
to a year in prison for libel after reporting on bribery and tax evasion by
local authorities. In striking similarity to the N!DA case, Rahimov alleges he
was tortured for three days by local police after refusing to apologise to the
local authorities whose criminal activity he had uncovered. Meanwhile in
Jalilabad region, the journalist Afgan Sadigov is set to begin trial for “infliction
of a minor harm to heath” after an altercation with a local woman with a
history of getting into physical confrontations with citizens who anger
regional authorities through dissent or critical reporting. Sadigov faces up to
five years in prison.
 
“The arbitrary
persecution of Azerbaijani journalists is disturbing, and it is vital that the
state protect its citizens’ rights to expression and freedom from torture and
arbitrary detention,” said Robert Hårdh, Director of Civil Rights Defenders,
“these cases represent a serious deterioration in the rule of law in the
country, and it is vital that steps be taken to remedy the situation.”
 
Independent
journalists who stay out of jail are also having a hard time reaching their
audience, as the websites of the local affiliates of RFE/RL and Voice of
America have reportedly been blocked . 

Finally, on 30 November
parliament passed laws criminalising “online defamation or derogation of honor
and dignity” of President Ilham Aliyev. Violators face fines up to 1000 AZN
(€537) or two years in prison, or 1500 AZN (€805) or a year in prison if they
do so using “fake profiles or nicknames.” As online defamation is already
criminalised in Azerbaijan, this amounts primarily to another warning that
dissent, in any form, will be harshly punished.
 
‘The new law is a
blatant attempt to clamp down on the only remaining space for Azerbaijani
people to freely express themselves in a country where traditional media have
been silenced via legal means and harassment’, said Gulnara Akhundova, Head of
Department at International Media Support.
 
The undersigned
organisations call on the Azerbaijani authorities to cease the
politically-motivated prosecution and torture of journalists, to repeal the new
laws further criminalising dissent and free speech, to vacate the conviction of
Qiyas Ibrahimov and cease the persecution of Bayram Mammadov, and finally the
public unfettered access to independent sources of news and opinion.
Furthermore, we call on Azerbaijan’s international partners to use their
leverage, both bilaterally and through multilateral institutions, to hold
Azerbaijan accountable to its international commitments, and the board of the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative to take the aforementioned
violations of basic human rights into consideration when deciding on
Azerbaijan’s continued membership.
 
Supporting organisations:
 
ARTICLE 19
CEE Bankwatch Network
Civil Rights Defenders
Freedom Now
Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights
Human Rights House Foundation
Index on Censorship
Institute for Reporters’ Freedom and Safety
International Media Support
International Partnership for Human Rights
MYMEDIA
Netherlands Helsinki Committee
Norwegian Helsinki Committee
PEN America
People in Need
Platform
Reporters Without Borders
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) 