The Observatory - Newsletter July - August 2003
September  5, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / 2003 / SeptemberThe Observatory - Newsletter July - August 2003The Observatory - Newsletter No. 23 July-August 2003   July 2003  ALGERIA - Obstacles to liberty of demonstration / Arrests  July 10th 2003 - DZA 002 / 0703 / OBS 064.01  Several mothers of disappeared were arrested on July 9th in Oran  during the weekly assembly of the families of disappeared in front of  the law Court, in which participated approximately 70 persons. Mrs  Boutaiba Setti, representative of the Committee SOS disappeared of  the wilaya of Oran, was interviewed by a journalist and then was ill- treated and embarked by force in a car by an officer in civilian  belonging to security services. Mrs Bouguetaya Yakout, her daughter, Mrs Boussekak Yamina, and 3  other mothers of disappeared were also arrested and conducted to the  central commissionership. They were finally released but were  convened on July 12th to the central commissionership and to be  presented to the public prosecutor's department for "confusion in the  law and order".  GUATEMALA - Threats July 10th 2003 - GTM 002 / 0603 / OBS 028.1  After the murder on June 11th 2003, of the auxiliary of the  Procuraduría de los Derechos  Humanos de Guatemala (PDH) in Chimaltenango, Mr. Jose Israel Lopez  Lopez, Mrs Thelma Peláez, district attorney who investigates the  case, received threats on June 19th and 23rd, with the clear object  to dissuade her from continuing this investigation. Moreover, Élmer  War, Waldemar Barrera, Alex Toro and Luis Ramos, regional delegates  of this institution, were object of serious threats because of their  activities of defence of human rights.  HONDURAS - Murder/ Threats/ Attacks  July 23rd 2003 - HND 002 / 0703 / OBS035  On July 18th, Mr. Reyes, Promotor de la Pastora Social del Medio  Ambiente de la Iglesia Católica of Olancho, returned to his house  around 8 p.m. Then, he went out for the patio where he received 6  shots. Apparently, three strongly armed men fled of the place for a  channel that goes up to the river of the locality.  The same day, in Catacamas (Olancho's Department), Father Osmin  Flores, who belongs to the movement of environmental protection and  who has been threatened several times, was object of alertness and  harassment from armed men who were parked opposite to the House Cural  in the Parish Holy Tomás. On July 14th, another community figure of  the environmental protection who fights against the deforestation, Mr  Gilberto Flores, was object of an attempt of murder in front of the  offices of the Social Pastoral in Juticalpa.  INDONESIA - Attack / Threats / Arbitrary detention July 3rd 2003 - IDN 001/0503/OBS 026.1  On June 28th, the office of the Legal Aid Institution (LBH) was  attacked by security forces in Banda Aceh, Province of Aceh. Seven  members of the security forces entered the LBH office where they met  its director, Mr. Darmi and asked him where Asiah, the coordinator of  the investigation division of NGO Kontras Aceh, was. They left after  Mr. Darmi informed them that Kontras, who had previously shared an  office with LBH-Aceh, had recently moved to another office. Later on,  having failed to locate Mr. Darmi and Mr. Syarifah Murlina, a lawyer  from LBH's litigation staff, the same group of men entered the LBH  office again and carried out a search. They kicked down the door of  the litigation room and threw down books from the shelf. They tried  in vain to force open the filing cabinet in the database room. They  threatened to return later on.  MAURITANIA - Breach of the independence of the Bar July 15th 2003 - MAU 001/0703/OBS 033  On July 7th, the President of the Bar, Mr. Mahfoudh Ould Bettah was  suspended by the Council of the Order of Mauritania for a duration of  3 years. In spite of operations from partisans of the authorities,  Mr. Bettah, President of the Bar for more than 12 years had been re- elected in the absolute majority on June 27th 2002 in Nouakchott.  This vote was invalidated, in violation of the Mauritanian penal code  of procedure, and a second tour was organized by the authorities.  Pressures were exercised on lawyers and the partisans of Mr. Bettah  preferred not to take part in the vote, disputing the irregularities  of the procedure. On December 16th 2002, a president of the Bar,  close to the power, was officially recognized by the general public  prosecutor's department.   MOROCCO - New condemnation of a Sahraoui activist Press release - July 4th 2003  On June 25th, Mr. Dkhil El Moussaoui, member of the Forum Vérité et  Justice (FVJ), was condemned by the Court of appeal of Laâyoun to one  year of detention and 5000 dirhams of fine for " incitation to  confusion to Law and Order". This condemnation happened indeed, in a  context of continuous harassment of the members of FVJ / Sahara  Section.   SUDAN - Arbitrary arrests / Disappearance / Freedom of expression July 4th  2003 - SDN 001/ 0603 / OBS 031  On July 2nd, Mr. Gazi Suliman, lawyer and Chairperson of the Sudan  Human Rights Group was arrested from his home by a number of  individuals from the National Security Agency (NSA). He was then  transported to the NSA Political section where he was questioned  about the Khartoum Declaration (E'laan El Khartoum') and the press  conference that was scheduled to be held at his office later that day  to officially announce the signing of this declaration. However, NSA  officers surrounded the office in an attempt to prevent the press  conference from taking place, detaining all those who were present  for one hour before transferring them to NSA headquarters and  releasing them later on in the day. Following two hours of  interrogation, Mr. Suliman returned to his home before he was taken  away once more by NSA officers. He was released on 15th July.    TUNISIA - The independence of Tunisian justice in danger Press release - July 7th 2003 Press release - July 10th 2003  After several hearings to which the Observatory had mandated an  observer jointly with the International Commission of Jurist and  Lawyers without Borders- Belgium, the Court of Appeal of Tunis has  acceded on the 8th of July to the demand of the six lawyers members  of the RCD, party in power, in order to obtain the retroactive  cancellation of the call to the strike lunched on the 2nd of February  2002 by the national Council of the order of lawyers of Tunisia. This  call to strike was aimed at demonstrating against the several  irregularities occurred during the trial of the head of the labour  communist party and against the violence perpetrated against lawyers  and observer on this specific occasion. This decision constitute a  very serious precedent, aiming obviously at controlling a Bar judged  to independent and forbidden them the right to strike.    TUNISIA - Obstacles to freedom of  meeting / Attack  July 15th 2003 - TUN 002 / 0703 / OBS 033  On July 13th, numerous policemen prevented a reception organized by  the Tunisian league of free writers (not recognized), on the occasion  of the second birthday of the association. The policemen stopped the  guests in a street approximately 20 metres of the place of residence  of Mr. Jalloul Azzouna, writer and President of the league, where the  reception had to take place, obliging therefore all the guests to  turn back. Arrived a bit later, Mrs Nasraoui and Mr Azzouna managed  to cross the dam. However, while Mrs Nasraoui came down from her car,  the men in civilian pushed her against a wall and violently struck  her. Mr Azzouna, who tried to defend her was ill-treated in the rush  which followed. Mrs Nasraoui, who suffers from bruises in arms was in  medical vacation for six days and decided to raise a complaint. TURKEY - Threats July 10th 2003 - TUR 001/0703/OBS 032  On July 8th, Mr. Ridvan Kizgin, Chairman of the Bingöl Branch of the  Human Rights Association (IHD), received a call on his mobile phone  by a person who introduced herself as the Provincial Commissioner for  Police Regiment and asked Mr. Kizgin to report to the Provincial  Commissionership. The reason invoked was that one of his statements  on human rights violations were false. He was asked not to make new  statements before he has talked to the Provincial Commissioner and to  explain to the press and public opinion that human rights violations  denounced were not representing the reality. Mr. Kizgin refused to go  to the commissionership. On July 9th, Mr. Kizgin was called again on  his mobile phone. The person on the phone said that the commissioner  wanted to see him and asked him to come to the commissionership to  withdraw his statements on human rights violations and to make a new  statement that these allegations were not correct. Mr. Kizgin refused  again and condemned the method used by the provincial authorities.   August 2003  BELARUS - Restrictions to freedom of association August 8th 2003 - Open letter to the authorities   On 16 April 2003, the President of the Republic signed Decree No. 13  restricting the possibility for NGOs to represent physical persons in  civil trials. Moreover, an increasing number of NGOs are liquidated  for alleged administrative irregularities. This was the case in April  for "Ratuha", "Varuta" and "Youth Christian Union", in May for "Civil  Initiatives" and for "Kontur" in July. On 2 August, judicial  proceedings started for the liquidation of "Legal Assistance to  Population". Moreover, "Viasna", a Human Rights NGO, has also lately experienced  check-ups, or threats of check-ups, of five of its offices. In July the Justice Board of Minsk City Executive issued a warning to  the local Human Rights NGO "Independent Association of Juridical  Research", because it had represented the interests of "Ratusha"  during the liquidation trial. On 29 July, the "Belarus Organisation of Working Women" was also  warned for violation of the rules concerning production and keeping  of seals, and creation of bodies that were not mentioned in its  Statutes. Finally, Professor Yuri Bandazhevski remains in prison. On 7 July ,  the UN Human Rights Committee declared that Mr Bandazhevsky's  communication for consideration under the Optional Protocol to the  International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights was admissible.  Furthermore, the Committee requested the State of Belarus to submit  written explanations clarifying the matter.  CAMEROON - Arbitrary detention/ Liberations/ Threats August 13th 2003 - CMR 001/ 0803 /OBS 039  August 14th 2003 - CMR 001/ 0803/OBS 039.1  On the 11th of August, Mr. Blaise Yacoubou and Mr. Aminou Mohamadou,  members of the Movement for the Defence of Human Rights and Freedoms  (MDDHL) were arrested and detained. On the 10th of August, there were  summoned to the enquiry forces of Maroua in order to get back their  identity cards which had been confiscated the 30th of April while  they were on a mission in Ndoukoula. However, on the 11th of August,  they were informed that they were looked after since several months  and were considered as being in flight. Mr. Blaise Yacoubou and Mr.  Aminou Mohamadou were eventually released on August 14, but they were  in a very precarious health condition following their very bad  imprisonment conditions. Their arrest took place after instructions  were given by the Prosecutor of the Republic to the Courts of Diamare  Province, who officially ordered all police officers to arrest any  human rights defender present in his district.   CHINA- Arbitrary detention/ Judicial proceedings August 22nd 2003- CHN 001/ 0803/ OBS 041  August 26th 2003- CHN  001/0803/OBS 041.1 August 29th 2003- CHN 001/0803/OBS 041.2  A formal public prosecution was opened against Mr. Zheng Enchong, a  Shanghai lawyer involved in the defence of economic and social rights  of displaced persons, on charges of illegally obtaining state  secrets. According to the information received, Mr. Zheng Enchong was  arrested on June 6, after assisting displaced families in more than  500 cases relating to Shanghai's urban redevelopment projects. He is  currently detained at the Shanghai Public Security Bureau Detention  Center. During his secret trial on the 28th of August, 100 protesters  were arrested. The verdict will be given beginning of September.   COLOMBIA -  Arbitrary arrest  August 6th 2003  - COL 002 / 0803 / OBS 037  In the night of July 30th, the lawyer Teresa de Jesus Cedeño Galíndez  was detained in Bogota, when she was in a public establishment. She  was immediately transferred  to the General District attorney's office of the State and accused of  "procedural fraud". According to the information received, the  detention of Mrs. Cedeño Galíndez took  place without the total fulfilment of the legal formalities. In the  morning of August 1st, Mrs. Cedeño Galíndez was hospitalized due to  her precarious conditions of health,  leaving her in total lack of communication with her family, her  colleagues and her lawyers. On August 2nd, she was transferred to the  women's national jail "El Buen Pastor".  COLOMBIA- Threats / Kidnapping August 19th 2003 - COL 003/0803/OBS 040  On the 15th of August 2003, Mr. Mauricio Alvarez, Mr. Víctor Jaimes,  Mr. Juvencio Sieja and Mr. Elkin Menco, board members of the Unión  Sindical Obrera (USO) de los  Trabajadores del Petróleo, in Barrancabermeja ( Department of  Santander) received serious death threats. These threats came from an  armed group named M.D.U : Muerte  a Dirigentes de la Unión Sindical Obrera (Death to USO leaders).  These kind of deaths threats are part of a context of kidnapping,  threats, designation, persecution and  criminalization of trade unions activities occurring since several  years against USO.  GUATEMALA - Threats/ Intimidations August 13th 2003- GTM 003 / 0803 / OBS 038  From the 26th  of July to the 8th of August 2003, the offices and the  employees of the Fundacion Rigoberta Menchú Tum (FRMT) in particular  the foundation's director, Mr.  Gustavo Meoño Brenner, were harassed by means of an intimidating  control operation by armed men dressed in uniforms belonging to a  private security agency. A  complaint was lodged at the Public Ministry and at the Human Rights  Prosecutor, respectively on the 6th and 7th of August. On the 8th of August, Mrs. Rigoberta Menchú Tum, chairman of the  FRMT, was followed by a white pick up to the Foundation's office. At  a certain point, the pick up tried to  hit Mrs. Menchù's car. Moreover, on the 8th of August 2003, at 21h25  in the evening, Mr. Francisco Menchú, in charge of the security at  the FRMT, was assaulted by  individuals in a white taxi driving very fast and which stopped next  to him in order to get him into the taxi. After being beaten, the  individuals took him his purse and his  papers.  GUATEMALA- Threats August 14th 2003 - Open letter  The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders notes  with concern that repression of human rights defenders in Guatemala  has intensified over the past few  months. On the 12th of August 2003, a certain numbers of social  organisations received a letter by an unidentified group in which the  work of the human rights  organisations were discredited and some known human rights defenders  were threatened to death, including Rigoberta Menchú Tum, as well as  journalists and other  representatives of the Frente Civico por la Democracia.  GUATEMALA- Attack / robbery/ aggression August 28th 2003- GTM 002/0603/OBS 028.2  On August 28th 2003, the main office of the Procuraduría de los  Derechos Humanos de Guatemala (PDH) was broken into, by a group of  unidentified men who destroyed  materials and important documentations, stole two computers and hard  discs and who moreover soiled the office with faeces. According to  the information received, this  aggression is related to the important work realised by the  Procuraduría de los Derechos Humanos de Guatemala, which investigated  on several cases of human rights  violation in which  the implication of some government officials were  denounced.   GUINEA BISSAU - Threats August 4th 2003 - GNB 002 / 0803 / OBS 036  On July 9th, during a radio broadcast, Mr. Joao Vaz Mane, Vice- president of the League of Human Rights of Guinea Bissau (LGDH)  denounced the criminal schemes of  some policemen. During a press conference given on July 14th onto the  activities of the police, Mr. Bitchofla Na Fafé, General Police  Commissioner publicly discredited the  activities of the league and openly announced his will to open  judicial procedures against Mr. Vaz Mane. These threats intervene in  a pre-electoral context where the work of  the representatives of the civil society is ceaselessly denigrated by  the national authorities.  LAOS- Restrictions to freedom of association August 20th 2003- Open letter to the authorities  The Observatory sent an open letter to the Laos authorities  expressing its concern in the serious restrictions of freedom of  expression, demonstration and association in  Laos. Especially, any person daring to express its opinions contrary  to the officials positions and to ask for democratic reforms, risks  systematically to be arrested and  detained. The Observatory has thus express its preoccupations regards  the fate of several persons still detained after having demonstrated  in 1999, as well as many  persons who have disappeared after their arrests in similar  conditions in 2000 and 2001. Moreover, there is still no possibility of establishing human rights  defence groups in Laos. Although the Constitution provides citizens  with the right to organize and join  associations, this right is severely restricted in practice. The  Government registers and controls all associations and prohibits  associations that criticize it. In the economic  and social field, trade union freedom does still not exist, the only  trade unions being controlled by the State.  LEBANON - Arrest/ Detention August 13th 2003 - 001/ 0005/ OBS 33.01  On August 8th, Mr. Muhamad Mugraby, a lawyer inscribed at the Bar of  Beirut and human rights defender especially acknowledged for his  engagement against corruption  in the Lebanese judiciary circle, was arrested. The general attorney  had ordered his arrest following a complaint from the lawyers order  of Beirut, accusing him of having  misused his lawyer title. According to Lebanese law, this infraction  can be sanctioned with 6 months to 3 years imprisonment. He was  eventually released on August 29th.  The proceeding is still pending.  MALAYSIA - Restrictions to freedom of movement August 20th - Open letter  On August 18th, Ms. Cynthia Gabriel, Executive Director of the human  rights organization Suara Rakyat Malaysia (SUARAM), was denied entry  into Sarawak by  Immigration officers at Miri Airport. Ms. Cynthia Gabriel was to  attend a workshop entitled "Workshop on Globalisation and its Impacts  on Indigenous Peoples in Malaysia"  in Miri, Sarawak. Immigration officers at the airport told Ms.  Gabriel that she was denied entry as her name was blacklisted. She  was given no information on this black list  nor the reason why she was on the list. She had to take a flight back  to Kuala Lumpur a few hours later.  RUSSIAN FEDERATION - NGO assault / Physical attacks August 26th 2003 - RUS 001/ 0803/ OBS 042  On 14 August 2003, the office of the human rights organisation  Memorial Saint Petersburg and its staff was attacked. According to  the information received, a young man  arrived at the Memorial office, allegedly looking for those in charge  of the anti-fascist commission. As this commission was not available,  he came back later on with  another man and they threatened a member of staff with hammers.  After, they seized the Chairman's laptop computer and his mobile  phone. Mr. Vladimir Schnitke and a  third member of staff were then gagged, their hands tied up, and were  locked up in the closet. They were released later on that day, after  a visitor called the police. The two  men also stole Mr. Schnitke's pocket computer, his diary and his  address book.  UZBEKISTAN - Condemnation August 19th 2003 - UZB 002/ 0503/ OBS 025.1  Mr. Ruslan Sharipov, an Uzbek human rights activist and independent  journalist notably involved in the denunciation of corruption, was  sentenced on August 13th 2003, to five and a half years imprisonment  for among other charges, homosexuality and sexual relations with  minor. Mr. Sharipov, who had claimed his innocence from the very beginning  of the procedure, has "confessed" all the crimes he was accused of,  during the hearing, visibly under physical and psychological pressure  from the militia and judicial authorities. 