Syrian Arab Republic:  The Observatory / The Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN): Press Release: Syria: Closure of the Syrian Centre for Media and Freedom of Expression
September 15, 2009
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2009 / SeptemberSyrian Arab Republic: The Observatory / The Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN): Press Release: Syria: Closure of the Syrian Centre for Media and Freedom of ExpressionParis - Geneva - Copenhagen, September 15, 2009: The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN), express their deep concern following the closure of the Syrian Centre for Media and Freedom of Expression (SCM). In the afternoon of September 13, 2009, without prior warning, the security services, the police and the mayor of Maza region came to SCM's premises and informed its Director, Mr. Mazen Darwish, that they had come to close the office. They did not present any warrant to legally justify the closure and provided no explanation as to the reasons for the decision. At 3 pm, the door was sealed and SCM's office was officially closed. Mr. Darwish and his colleagues were denied the right to take some equipment with them. On three occasions over the past week, the security services had exercised pressure against SCM in order to stop its activities including the publication of reports. SCM's Director and board members are now inquiring into the reasons for the closure of their organisation. The Observatory and the EMHRN express their deepest concern following the closure of the SCM and fear that its members might suffer further harassment, including the arrest of its director. The Observatory and the EMHRN urge the Syrian authorities to re-open the SCM and allow it to continue its legitimate activities to promote human rights, and in particular the freedom of expression including freedom of the press. The SCM has been active in monitoring violations to freedom of expression and undertaking joint activities with national NGOs. More generally, the Observatory and the EMHRN urge the Syrian authorities to immediately put an end to all forms of harassment against Syrian human rights defenders and civil society activists, in conformity with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998. Undersigned organisations also call upon the Syrian authorities to abide by international human rights standards to which the Syrian Arab Republic is a state party.  For more information, please contact:  FIDH: Gaël Grilhot / Karine Appy: + 33 1 43 55 25 18 OMCT: Eric Sottas: + 41 22 809 49 39 EMHRN: +45.32.64.17.16 