Burundi:  No news from Marie-Claudette Kwizera since her kidnapping, the Observatory refers the case to the UN
January 22, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Burundi / 2016 / JanuaryBurundi: No news from Marie-Claudette Kwizera since her kidnapping, the Observatory refers the case to the UN

PRESS
RELEASE – THE OBERVATORY
  
Paris-Geneva,
January 22nd 2016 - 43 days after the enforced disappearance of
Marie-Claudette Kwizera, Burundian authorities are still refusing to provide
any information about her fate or whereabouts. Facing this silence, the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (FIDH-OMCT joint
program) decided to report the case to the Working Group on Enforced or
Involuntary Disappearances (WGEID) of the United Nations in order to locate her
without further delay.
 
On
December 10th 2015, around 6PM, Ms. Marie-Claudette Kwizera, treasurer of the Iteka League, FIDH member
organization in Burundi, was abducted near the central polyclinic of Bujumbura.
She was forced into a vehicle of Burundian National Intelligence Service (NIS).

 
On
December 12th, a NIS agent named Mr. Dieudonné Bigirimana aka
"Taison" informed the family of Ms. Kwizera that she was detained in the
premises of NIS, and asked for 3.5 million Burundian francs (about 2050 euros)
in exchange for her release. However, despite receiving the ransom, no
information about the location of Ms. Kwizera was provided. The family then
filed a complaint, following which Mr. Bigirimana was himself arrested on
January 4th 2016,  and he has
been detained by the NIS since.
 
On
January 13th 2016, one of Ms. Kwizera's relatives went to NIS premises
and was told that agents have searched her in the detention facilities but have
failed to find her. 
 
"The
Observatory will do everything in its power to obtain the release of
Marie-Claudette Kwizera and to ensure that those responsible for her
disappearance are brought to justice” said
Karim Lahidji, FIDH president. 
 
“This
disappearance forms part of the climate of repression of civil society in
Burundi, leading dozens of human rights defenders and their families to exile.
No democratic society can exist without human rights defenders. It is urgent to
take all necessary measures to remedy to this situation” said Gerald
Staberock, Secretary General of OMCT. 
 
The
Observatory is concerned about the respect for the physical and psychological
integrity of Marie-Claudette Kwizera and calls upon Burundian authorities to
immediately disclose her whereabouts and to take all necessary measures to
release her.
 
The
Observatory also calls upon Burundian authorities to publicly condemn her
abduction and to launch a prompt, impartial and thorough investigation to
identify those responsible in order to bring them to justice. 
 
For more information, please contact :
·      
FIDH : Audrey Couprie / Arthur Manet : + 33 1 43 55 25 18
·       OMCT : Delphine Reculeau
/ Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui : + 41 22 809 49 39 