Macedonia:  Open Letter: Concern on the situation of the LGBTI community in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
November 11, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Macedonia / 2014 / NovemberMacedonia: Open Letter: Concern on the situation of the LGBTI community in the Former Yugoslav Republic of MacedoniaFYROM_1111142 pages / 102 KB​Mr. Gjorge
Ivanov
President of the Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, 
Villa Vodno, Aco
Karamanov Str. Nn, 1000 Skopje 
 
Mr.
Nikola Gruevski
Prime Minister of the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Blvd. Ilinden No.2, 1000
Skopje

Mr. Adnan Jashari
Minister of Justice of the Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, 
Dimitrie Cupovski"
no. 9, 1000 Skopje
 
Mr. Gordana
Jankulovska
Minister of Interior
of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Dimce Mircev no.9, 1000 Skopje
 
 
Geneva-Paris, November 11,
2014
 
 
Re: Concern on
the situation of the LGBTI community in the Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia
 
Excellencies,

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme
of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), is writing to you to express concern
regarding the multiple attacks and acts of harassment targeting the LGBTI
community in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
 
On the night of October 23, 2014, a 26-year-old girl received a head injury and
an 18-year-old boy received injuries in the leg during an attack against the
cafe ‘Damar’ in the Old Bazaar in Skopje, in which the Helsinki Committee of
Macedonia (HCM) was holding a celebration to mark the second anniversary of the
opening of the LGBTI center. The celebration was interrupted when a large group
of masked thugs started throwing bottles and crates to the people present at
the cafe.
 
According to the information received by the Observatory from
reliable sources, this situation is recurrent for the LGBTI community in the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, this attack being the sixth taking place
against this LGBTI center during its two years of existence. It is important to
notice that because of frequent attacks the seat of the LGBT community was
moved from the Old Bazaar to another location. 
 
The Observatory expresses its deep concern about the
above-mentioned events, and calls upon the authorities of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to
publicly condemn the attacks against the LGBTI community and to take measures
to publicly legitimize their rights and activities. 
 
Moreover, the Observatory calls for an immediate, thorough,
transparent investigation into this attack, in order to identify all
those responsible, bring them before an independent tribunal and, in
case of conviction, apply them the sanctions provided by the law.
 
We sincerely hope that you will take these
elements into account.
 
Yours sincerely,
 
Gerald
STABEROCK                                    Karim
LAHIDJI
OMCT Secretary
General                             FIDH
President 