Russian Federation:  Russia: Arbitrary arrests and detentions of 14 Uzbek citizens; alleged acts of torture
August  8, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2005 / AugustRussian Federation: Russia: Arbitrary arrests and detentions of 14 Uzbek citizens; alleged acts of tortureGeneva, August 8, 2005. In view of the deterioration of the situation of 14 Uzbek citizens arrested and detained since June 18, 2005, in Ivanovo, by the Russian Secret Services, please find below the letter the International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) has just sent to the President of the Russian Federation, Mr. Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin.  For more information, please contact OMCT: +41 (0)22 809 49 39.  President of the Russian Federation His Excellency  Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin Kremlin, Moscow Russia Fax: + 7 095 206 5173 / 230 2408  Geneva, 8 August 2005  Your Excellency,  The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), the world’s largest network of NGOs fighting against torture, has received new information from reliable sources concerning 14 Uzbek citizens arrested on June 18, 2005, in Ivanovo by the Russian Secret Service and detained since that date at the custody prison (CIZO) of  Ivanovo. The detainees are:  Mr. Umarali Sharipzhanovich Alimov, Mr. Hatam Jakubovich Hadzhimatov, Mr. Hurshid Hamralievich Hamzaev, Mr. Ilhomzhon Gulomovich Ismailov, Mr. Kabul Alimzhanovich Kasimhudzhaev, Mr. Obboshon Zikir’jahanovich Mahmudov, Mr. Abdurauf Abdulhafizovich Muhamadsobirov, Mr. Izzatullo Abdulhafizovich Muhamadsobirov, Mr. Rustam Jakubzhonovich Naimov, Mr. Mahmud Rustamovich Rustamhodzhaev, Mr. Shukrulo Hazhmitdinovich Sabirov, Mr. Mamurzhon Hozhimatovich Tashtemirov, Mr. Sardorbek Kamalhan Ugli Ulughodzhaev, and Mr. Iskandarbek Mamadalievich Usmanov.    According to the information received, at least three of the 14 ethnic Uzbek men currently being detained in Ivanovo, have been tortured: Mr. Hatam Jakubovich Hadzhimatov, Mr. Kabul Alimzhanovich Kasimhudzhaev, and Mr. Mahmud Rustamovich Rustamhodzhaev. They have allegedly been tortured with electric shocks while being questioned at the offices of the Ivanovo Organized Crime Squad (UPOB). Investigators from Uzbekistan were reportedly present while the men were being questioned, and threatened the above-mentioned detainees with mistreatments if they were deported to Uzbekistan.  The 14 Uzbek citizens are allegedly accused of involvement in “recent events in Uzbekistan” as well as of belonging to the “akromist” group. However, all 14 detainees reportedly deny these accusations. Moreover, only one of the detainees, Mr. Kabul Alimzhanovich Kasimhudzhaev, was in Andijan in May 2005. According to the information received, he went to Uzbekistan on May 10 and stayed until May 25, 2005, in order to renew his Uzbekistani passport.   One of the detainees, Mr. Hatam Jakubovich Hadzhimatov, has not been able to be visited  by his wife since he was detained. When Ms. Hadzhimatova asked the District (rajon) Prosecutor services about visiting her husband, she was informed that the Prosecutor of the Region (oblast’) of Ivanovo, Mr. S.L. Kruglov, was the only person able to make that decision. However, Mr. S.L. Kruglov stated that in fact it was the District Prosecutor, Mr. A.B. Mihalev, who could take the decision. Mr. A.B. Mihalev eventually informed Ms. Hadzhimatova that she could file a petition with the Republic of Uzbekistan in order to visit her husband. OMCT recalls that according to the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, “prisoners shall be allowed under necessary supervision to communicate with their family and reputable friends at regular intervals, both by correspondence and by receiving visits” (Art. 37).  OMCT is gravely concerned over the fact that the 14 detainees could be extradited to Uzbekistan. The documents for their extradition were reportedly sent by Uzbekistan to the Office of the State Prosecutor in Moscow on July 12, 2005. According to the information received, the detainees run the risk of being extra-judicially extradited to Uzbekistan. Such measure was previously taken against Mr. Manobzhon Rahmatullaev, an Uzbek citizen living in Russian Federation in July 2004.   OMCT urges you:  to take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of all persons detained;  to order a thorough and impartial investigation into the allegations of torture and identify those responsible and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  to order the immediate release of the detainees in absence of valid charges consistent with international law standards. If such charges exist, OMCT urges you to conduct the extradition process with the appropriate judicial guarantees.   OMCT further urges the Russian authorities to guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with international human rights standards, and most notably to comply with the article 3 of the Convention against Torture (CAT), to which the Russian Federation is a party, which states that “no State Party shall expel, return (“refouler”) or extradite a person to another State where there are substantial grounds for believing that he would be in danger of being subjected to torture”.   We hope you will take these requests into account,  Yours sincerely,   Eric Sottas Director    Cc: Ambassador of the Russian Federation, Mr. Leonid Skotnikov, Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the United Nations in Geneva, Av. de la Paix 15, CH-1211, Geneva 20, Switzerland, e-mail : mission.russian@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41 22 734 40 44  Mr. Islam Abduganiyevich Karimov, President of Uzbekistan, ul. Uzbekistanskaya 43, Rezidentsia prezidenta, 700163 Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan, Fax: +998 71 133 7258  Ambassador of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Uzbekistan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 1853, 1215 Geneva 15, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 799 43 02, E-mail: uzbekistan@bluewin.ch 