Sudan:  Sudan: five members of the NDA political leadership have been re-arrested
May 15, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2001 / MaySudan: Sudan: five members of the NDA political leadership have been re-arrestedCase SDN 150501  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sudan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudanese Victims of Torture Group, a member of the OMCT network, that five members of the NDA political leadership have been re-arrested in Sudan.  According to the information received, the Sudanese Security Forces have re-arrested five memebers of the NDA political leadership secretariat, including: Ali al-Sayyid (DUP), Mohammed Mahjoub (SCP), Joseph Ukello (USAP), Mohammed Wida Ala (NDA spokesman), and Dr. Mohammed Suleiman (Trade Union Alliance). The men were reportedly arrested at their homes in Khartoum between 1 and 2 am on Friday May 11th 2001, and taken to local police stations.  According to the information received, the detainees had previously been arrested on December 6th 2000, following a meeting with an American diplomat in Khartoum, on the grounds that NDA members were part of a conspiracy planning to incite a popular uprising, disrupt national security and support the rebel movement with American logistical support. They were released on bail two weeks ago, following an appeal by their lawyers to the Appeal Court. However, the government appealed against this decision to the Supreme Court, which then decided to have them re-arrested on Thursday May 10th 2001.  According to the information received, the security forces acted independently and in breach of the Ministry of Justice's procedure, by arresting these men on Friday, which is a holiday in Sudan. The detainees’ lawyers were planning to appeal against the re-arrest on Saturday May 12th.  OMCT is gravely concerned about the detainees' physical and psychological integrity, and fears that they may be subjected to torture during their detention.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:  -	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Ali al-Sayyid, Mohammed Mahjoub, Joseph Ukello, Mohammed Wida Ala and Dr. Mohammed Suleiman; -	order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; -	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these arrests, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  -	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, People's Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan. Telex : 22385 PEPLC SD or 22411 KAID SD - Fax : +249 11 771 724  Mr. Ali Mohamed Osman, Minister of Justice and Attorney - General, Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan.  Telex : 22459, KHRJA SD or 22461 KHRJA SD (via Ministry of Foreign Affairs) - Fax : +249 11 774 063  Mr. Mustafa Osman Mohamad Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan.  Telex : 22459 KHRJA SD or 22461 KHRJA SD - Fax : +249 11 774 063  Please also write to the embassies of Sudan in your respective country.  Geneva, May 15, 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 