Russian Federation:  Arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of the Head of Human Rights Centre (HRC) "Memorial" in Chechnya Mr. Oyub Titiev.
January  9, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2018 / JanuaryRussian Federation: Arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of the Head of Human Rights Centre (HRC) "Memorial" in Chechnya Mr. Oyub Titiev.

URGENT
APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 RUS 001 / 0118 / OBS 004
Arbitrary detention
Judicial harassment
Russian Federation
January
9, 2018
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the FIDH and the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
the Chechen Republic, Russian
Federation.
 
Description
of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the arbitrary detention
and judicial harassment of the Head of Human Rights Centre (HRC)
"Memorial" in Chechnya Mr. Oyub Titiev.
 
According to the information received, in
the morning of January 9, 2018, Mr. Oyub Titiev left his home in the village of Kurchaloi, in the Chechen
Republic, to head to a meeting with a friend scheduled at 9am and subsequently
to the office of HRC "Memorial" in Grozny. Mr. Titiev being more than
hour late for the meeting with a friend whose identity is not being revealed on
purpose, the latter spotted Mr. Titiev on a road between the villages Kurchaloi
and Mairtup, next to the bridge on the river Khumyk. Next to Mr. Titiev were
5-6 traffic police officers inspecting his car. Mr. Titiev gave his friend a
sign not to approach him, and after the both cars left - that of Titiev and the
second belonging to the traffic police - he headed to the Kurchaloi District
Department of Internal Affairs supposing Mr. Titiev would be taken there.
Although he was not allowed to enter the District Department of Internal
Affairs, Mr. Titiev's car present outside and unofficial sources allowed him to
assume Mr. Titiev's detention.
 

Despite repeated calls, the District Department officially kept 
denying Mr. Titiev's presence. Several hours later, Mr. Titiev's 
lawyer confirmed that his client was charged under Art. 228 of the Criminal 
Code of the Russian Federation possessing drugs in large amounts. If 
convicted, he risks up to ten years of imprisonment. Up to date, Mr. Titiev 
was denied access to his lawyer while his detention had not been officially 
confirmed by the authorities until 7 hours after his detention when 
Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Interior of the Chechen Republic Apti 
Alaudinov confirmed to the Russian Ombudsman Tatiana Moskalkova that Mr. 
Titiev was being kept in Kurchaloi police station. Alaudinov promised to 
Moskalkova that his lawyer would be able to meet him "soon".


 

The Observatory strongly condemns the arbitrary detention and 
judicial harassment of Mr. Oyub Titiev and calls for his immediate and 
unconditional release. 

 

Background 
information:

 

In the context of appalling human rights violations in Chechnya, such 
as the right to access to a lawyer, widespread use of torture and 
ill-treatment, regular enforced disappearances and summary executions, 
murders of human rights defenders, journalists and lawyers and 
life-threatening risks they take by continuing their work, the Observatory 
fears that the abduction of Mr. Titiev and charges against him are a 
retaliation for his work.

 


This is the third time Chechen law enforcement use trumped up charges of drug possession to silence 
critical voices.

 


In 2014, the Urus-Martan Town Court of the 
Chechen Republic found the historian and head of an independent Chechen 
group Mr. Ruslan Kutaev guilty on 
dubious drug possession charges and sentenced him to four years in prison. 
In 2016, Chechnya-based Caucasian Knot journalist Mr. Zhalaudi 
Geriev was sentenced to three years in prison on trumped 
up of drug possession.

 


Actions requested:


 


Please write to the authorities of Russia, urging them to: 


 

i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological 
integrity of Oyub Titiev, as his arrest, arbitrary detention and judicial 
harassment seem to merely aim at sanctioning his human rights 
activities;

 

ii. Release 
Mr. Oyub Titiev immediately and unconditionally, and put an end to all forms 
of harassment, including at the judicial level, against him;

 

iii. Comply 
with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders, in particular with Articles 1, 12.1 and 12.2;

 

iv. Ensure 
in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in 
accordance with international human rights standards and international 
instruments ratified by the Russian Federation.


 


Addresses:

 


Vladimir 
Putin, President, Fax: + 7 495 606 5173; + 7 495 606 5173 / 630 2408


 


Dmitry 
Medvedev, Prime Minister, Twitter: @MedvedevRussia

 

Sergueï 
Lavrov, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax: + 7 495 644 2203

 

Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the 
United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 734 40 44, E-mail: 
mission.russian@vtxnet.ch


Embassy of the Russian Federation in Brussels, 
Belgium. Fax: +32 2 374 26 13. E-mail: amrusbel@skynet.be

 

Permanent Representation of the Russian Federation 
to the Council of Europe, France. Fax: (+33) (0) 3 88 24 19 74. Email: 
representationpermderussie@wanadoo.fr

 

Please also 
write to the diplomatic representations of Russia in your respective 
countries.

 

 
***

 


Paris-Geneva, January 9, 2018


 

Kindly 
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your 
reply.

 

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights 
Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to 
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights 
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of 

ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism 
implemented by international civil society.

 

To contact 
the Observatory, call the emergency line:

·
       E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org


·
       Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 
80

·
       Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 
22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29 