Cambodia: Suy indigenous peoples at risk of extinction
March 26, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Urgent Interventions / 2010 / MarchCambodia: Suy indigenous peoples at risk of extinction CAMBODIA Action File 243 full text8 pages / 179 KBOMCT ACTION FILE (KHM 260310.DESC)



ANOTHER LAND CONCESSION
JEOPARDISES THE SURVIVAL OF THE LAST SUY INDIGENOUS GROUP LIVING IN O RAL
DISTRICT, KOMPONG SPEU PROVINCE, CAMBODIA 

 
The International Secretariat of the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), on the basis of reliable information
received, expresses its concern at the situation faced by 1200 peoples living
in O Ral District, Kompong Speu Province,
Cambodia. The Suy indigenous group is losing its ancestral lands due to
Economic Land Concession (ELC) issued by the Government of Cambodia to private
companies for economic exploitation of corn agribusiness. OMCT is further
concerned that violence and intimidation will be inflicted on those communities
activists that, in the attempt to defending their economic, social and cultural
rights, and thus their survival, protest against concessions of their
lands. OMCT express
deep concern at the economic policy undertaken by the Royal Government of Cambodia
aimed at granting ELCs over indigenous and non-indigenous lands for economic
exploitation by private companies. This policy necessarily has a severe
negative impact on the livelihoods of rural communities and indigenous peoples
living on these lands, and thus exacerbates their already poor living
conditions. In its very recent Concluding
Observations, the United
Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD) expressed deep concerned at the Economic Land Concession policy in
Cambodia and its impact on indigenous peoples.OMCT recalls that the UN Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, in its General Comment No. 7 stated that “Evictions
are, prima facie, incompatible with the principles
of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
(ICESCR)”. In the same line, the Special Rapportuer on Adequate Housing emphasised that
forced evictions “involve gross violations of a range of internationally
recognized human rights, are justifiable only in the most exceptional
circumstances and in the full respect of international standards.”OMCT calls upon the Royal Government of Cambodia to abide by
international standards on forced evictions and to respect international and
national law on indigenous peoples. OMCT also calls upon the Royal Government
of Cambodia to suspend existing ELC and set a moratorium on new ELCs until an
independent commission sheds light on the current ELC procedures. OMCT also
calls upon the Royal Government of Cambodia to dismiss ungrounded charges
against community leaders struggling for their economic, social and cultural
rights. OMCT also calls upon the HLH Groups Limited
- the Singaporean Company to which was granted the indigenous land - to comply
with international law and to fully respect the economic, social
and cultural rights of all local communities affected by its economic
activities.


..............For further information, please contact:  Francesca Restifo, fr@omct.org 