Kyrgyzstan:  Insults to the honour and dignity of leading human rights defenders go unpunished
June 22, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2016 / JuneKyrgyzstan: Insults to the honour and dignity of leading human rights defenders go unpunished

Paris-Geneva, June 22, 2016 - On June 15, 2016,
the lawsuit brought against the President of Kyrgyzstan for his slanderous
statements against two leading Kyrgyz human rights activists, Tolekan Ismailova
and Aziza Abdirasulova, was dismissed by the Pervomaysk region court of
Bishkek. Throughout the trial, a number of violations of fair trial standards
and equality of arms principle were reported. Both defenders intend to appeal
the decision.
 
On June
15, 2016, the Pervomaysk region court of Bishkek dismissed the lawsuit brought
by Ms. Tolekan Ismailova, President of Bir Duino Kyrgyzstan, and Ms. Aziza
Abdirasulova, President of Kylym Shamy, against the Kyrgyz President
Almazbek Atambayev, in relation to a public speech he gave on May 14, 2016, in
which he mentioned their names next to those of alleged organisers of a
political upheaval, promising to ruthlessly suppress any attempts to
destabilise the country. Moreover, in his speech, the President resorted to the
“foreign agents” terminology, presenting Ms. Ismailova and Ms. Abdirasulova as
NGOs “faithfully serving their financial donors”. 
This
decision of the Pervomaysk region court was issued after the President's legal
representative highlighted in court that both human rights defenders had
misinterpreted the words of Mr. Atambayev, adding that the latter's comments
had been formulated in a positive spirit through the word “faithfully” and that
the words "serving financial donors" merely meant a praise for a well
done job.
 
“We are concerned about the
arguments presented by the legal representative of the Kyrgyz President.
Suggesting that these human rights defenders act as “foreign agents”
sends a very negative signal to the whole civil society in Kyrgyzstan and fuels
an atmosphere of impunity. It further shrinks the space, rather than widening
it”, regretted FIDH Honorary President Souhayr Belhassen.
 
“We are all the more concerned that
the decision of the Pervomaysk region court of Bishkek was issued after a
series of violations of fair trial standards and equality of arms principles
were reported”, said OMCT Secretary General
Gerald Staberock. “We hope that international standards will be respected
in appeal”, he added.
 
The
Observatory was indeed informed of a series of irregularities within the
framework of this trial: firstly, the court refused to add to the case file
certain documents which were aiming at strengthening the arguments of the
plaintiffs; secondly, several motions tabled by the plaintiffs, including those
summoning the President himself to the trial, requesting video recording of the
hearings, and requesting the removal of the judge from the case for lack of
impartiality (after the latter took stance in favour of the President's
representative on several occasions) were all rejected. It is also important to
emphasise that while an expert analysis requested by Ms. Ismailova to detect
the presence of elements of hatred in the President's speech was added to the
case file, the court did not refer to its findings when issuing its judgement.
The expert analysis stated that negative parallels, disproportionate
comparisons and generalisations referring to the plaintiffs' belonging to
groups aiming to destabilise the country as part of the alleged organisation of
a coup d'état contributed to give a negative perception of the two human rights
defenders towards the Kyrgyz public opinion. 
 
The
Observatory recalls that the first trial hearing took place on June 8, 2016 and
was observed by an Observatory delegation headed
by FIDH Honorary President Souhayr Belhassen to present the Observatory latest report on
Kyrgyzstan.
 
The
Observatory also deplores the continuation of slanderous statements in a number
of pro-government Kyrgyz media, accusing Ms. Ismailova and Ms. Abdirasulova of
anti-patriotic acts, such as “advocating against the “Foreign Agents Bill”,
supporting the LGBTI community, opposing the “Bill on the promotion of non
traditional sexual relationships" and defending those accused of terrorism
and extremism”. The Observatory recalls that similar statements had been made
last week against the Observatory mission delegates and personally against Ms.
Souhayr Belhassen, accusing them, inter alia, of “meddling in the
internal affairs of Kyrgyzstan” and “destabilising the country” in relation
with the mission's human rights and solidarity activities.
 
The
Observatory calls upon the Kyrgyz authorities to comply with fair trial
standards and equality of arms principles in the upcoming appeal trial opposing
Ms. Ismailova and Ms. Abdirasulova to the President of Kyrgyzstan, and to put
an end to all acts of harassment against them and all human rights defenders in
the country so they are able to carry out their work without hindrances.
 
The
Observatory more generally urges the Kyrgyz authorities to comply with the
recommendations outlined in the report published on June 8, 2016 and available
at:
 
https://www.fidh.org/IMG/pdf/kyrgyzstanobsang2016web.pdf
http://www.omct.org/files/2016/06/23793/kyrgyzstan_mission_report_2016_english.pdf
 
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. 