United States:  Worldwide Experts Discuss "Best Practices" for Litigation Before the UN Committee Against Torture as a Tool Against Torture
April 16, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Events / United States / 2013 / AprilUnited States: Worldwide Experts Discuss "Best Practices" for Litigation Before the UN Committee Against Torture as a Tool Against Torture      

CONTACT: Megan Smith
Public Relations Coordinator
American University Washington College of Lawmegans@wcl.american.edu
202-274-4276

American University
Washington College of Law’s Human Rights Brief to Publish Conference
Proceedings 
 
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
 
Washington,
D.C., April 15, 2013 -
American University Washington College of Law (AUWCL) and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) is sponsoring a full-day conference April 15 on the best
practices for litigation before the United Nations Committee against Torture
(UN CAT) to better protect and assist victims of torture. Panelists include
experts from the UN, regional systems, government, civil society, and academia,
and from countries including Russia, Senegal, Mexico, Kenya, Nepal, Paraguay, France,
Colombia and the UK.
 
Article 22 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment sets forth the Committee against Torture’s individual
complaints procedure. Under Article 22, the Committee considers petitions
(“communications”) from or on behalf of alleged victims of a violation of a
Convention provision(s) by a State Party that has recognized the Committee’s
competence to receive and consider communications (currently, 65 of the 153
State Parties to the Convention have done so). Since the establishment of this
procedure, the Committee has decided numerous cases, giving a clear response to
acts of torture committed around the world. 
 
“This conference will help States and petitioners better understand the
procedural and substantive issues involved in complaints brought before the
Committee against Torture, including the scope of the State Partys’ obligations
under article 14 of the Convention to provide redress and rehabilitation to victims,”
said Claudio Grossman, dean
of American University Washington College of Law and chairperson of the UN
Committee against Torture. “American
University Washington College of Law is honored to cohost this important event
with the World Organisation Against Torture, a renowned actor in protecting and
promoting human rights worldwide.”
 
“We need to reinforce the role of the complaint procedure to the
Committee Against Torture in the global fight against torture,” said Gerald
Staberock, secretary general of the OMCT. “It is time for states that have not
yet done so to accede to its jurisdiction, and we need to mobilize lawyers,
activists and human rights defenders to access this remedy effectively.
Strengthening victim and witness protection and building effective implementation
of decisions of the Committee will be central to making it the principal tool
for protecting individual victims.”
 
Conference panelists: 
 
·      
Claudio Grossman, dean, AUWCL;
chairperson, UN Committee against Torture
·      
Gerald Staberock, secretary-general,
World Organization Against Torture (OMCT)
·      
Gisella Gori, senior political
advisor, Delegation of the European Union to the United States 
·      
Helene Legeay, Middle East and North
Africa programme manager, Action by Christians for the Abolition of Torture
(ACAT)
·      
Carla Ferstman, director of Redress 
·      
Diego Rodríguez-Pinzón, professorial
lecturer-in-residence; co-director, Academy on Human Rights and Humanitarian
Law, AUWCL
·      
Ibrahima Kane, advocacy director,
Open Society Initiative for East Africa (OSIEA) 
·      
Octavio Amezcua, Mexican Commission
for the Defense and Promotion of Human Rights 
·      
Karina Moskalenko, Russian human
rights lawyer 
·      
Christian De Vos (’07), advocacy
officer, Open Society Justice Initiative
·      
Elsy Chemurgor Sainna, International
Commission of Jurists, Kenya
·      
Gabriela Echeverria, visiting
scholar, Human Rights Institute, Columbia Law School 
·      
Mario Lopez Garelli, senior human
rights specialist,  Inter-American Commission on Human Rights 
·      
Hari Phuyal, Advocacy Forum Nepal 
·      
Juan E. Méndez, visiting professor,
AUWCL; UN Special Rapporteur on Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment 
 
The Human Rights Brief at AUWCL will
publish the conference proceedings in its upcoming volume 20.4. Founded in 1994 as a publication of the
school’s Center for Human Rights and Humanitarian Law, the Brief is distributed to approximately 4,000 subscribers in over 130
countries.
 
Created in 1985, OMCT is the main coalition of international NGOs fighting
against torture, summary executions, enforced disappearances and all other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. With 311 affiliated organisations in its
SOS-Torture Network and many tens of thousands correspondents in every country,
OMCT is the most important network of NGOs working for the protection and the
promotion of human rights in the world. Visit omct.org.
 
Media inquiries can be directed to Megan Smith at AUWCL, megans@wcl.american.edu, 202-274-4276,  and to Fernanda Santana at OMCT, fas@omct.org, + 41 (793775446). 
 
###
 
In 1896, American
University Washington College of Law became the first law
school in the country founded by women. More than 100 years since its founding,
this law school community is grounded in the values of equality, diversity, and
intellectual rigor. The law school's nationally and internationally recognized
programs (in clinical legal education, trial advocacy, international law, and
intellectual property to name a few) and dedicated faculty provide its 1700 JD,
LL.M., and SJD students with the critical skills and values to have an
immediate impact as students and as graduates, in Washington, DC and around the
world. For more information, visit wcl.american.edu.
 

 
This
conference is being held with the financial assistance of the European Union
and the Oak Foundation. Its content is of the sole responsibility of OMCT and
cannot be considered as reflecting the position of its supporting institutions. 