Bangladesh:  Bangladesh: Arson attack on indigenous Jumma community in Sajek Union, the Chittagong Hill Tracts
August 29, 2008
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2008 / AugustBangladesh: Bangladesh: Arson attack on indigenous Jumma community in Sajek Union, the Chittagong Hill TractsDownload full article9 pages / 61 KBOMCT ACTION FILE: BGD 290808.ESCR The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) has received reliable information concerning ongoing violence against the indigenous Jumma community in the Chittagong Hill Tracts (CHT), culminating in an arson attack on 20 April 2008. According to the information received, Bengali settlers set fire to homes of the indigenous community in at least 7 villages, after they faced opposition from the villagers to their building of houses near or adjacent to the indigenous villagers’ homes. The attack took place at night and resulted in at least 76 houses being completely destroyed, as well as putting at risk the lives of the villagers. Allegedly, the Bengali settlers attacked the villages either at the instigation of the Bangladesh military forces or at least with their acquiescence. The affected indigenous community were not offered adequate compensation or alternative housing and many continue to live in the open air, without food. Further attacks took place on 18 June 2008. Additionally the military has continued to harass and intimidate the community and has brought false charges against some community members. OMCT recalls the statement made by the UN Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities that, “ultimate responsibility for preventing evictions rests with Governments”. Furthermore, forced evictions are frequently directed at the most marginalised sectors of society, involve violence and ill-treatment, and result in physical and psychological injury to those affected. To prevent further acts of violence and other human rights violations against marginalised, indigenous communities, OMCT calls on the Government of Bangladesh to establish an independent commission to conduct an inquiry into the arson attack on 20 April 2008 and into the harassment, intimidation and other forms of violence perpetrated by Bengali settlers and army personnel, and to ensure that all those responsible for human rights violations are brought to trial and that the victims of these violations are adequately compensated and rehabilitated. OMCT further calls on the Government to take immediate steps to implement fully the CHT Peace Accord of 1997, to release those detained on unsubstantiated charges, and to cease all Bengali settlements in Sajek Union and the CHT.  Please see the attached document for more detailed information and OMCT's requests for action. If you are unable to open this document, please inform us by e-mail. 