Cameroon:  Ongoing detention and judicial harassment of Mr. Mancho Bibixy Tse (known as BBC)
April  9, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cameroon / 2018 / AprilCameroon: Ongoing detention and judicial harassment of Mr. Mancho Bibixy Tse (known as BBC)
​ 
URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY                                                                                
 
CMR 001 / 0418 / OBS 042
Arbitrary detention /
Judicial harassment
Cameroon
April 9, 2018
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH
and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Cameroon.

 
Description of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sourcesabout the ongoing detention
and judicial harassment of Mr. Mancho Bibixy Tse (known as BBC),
journalist newscaster of Abakwa, a local radio programme aired on Bamenda
FM through which he has reported on the rights of the Anglophone minority
in Cameroon with a focus on their social and economic marginalisation. He has
also been working in close collaboration with the civil society consortium to
document rights violations in North-West Cameroon and to protect vulnerable
people in the Anglophone regions of Cameroon.
 
According
to the information received, on April 13, 2018, Mr. Mancho Bibixy will appear
before the Military Tribunal in Yaoundé, where he is facing charges of “secession”,
“terrorism”, “rebellion”, “inciting civil war”, “spreading false information
through social media”, “attempting to change the constitutional regime”,
“outrage to a public body” and “failure to hold his ID card” under the 2014
terrorism law and which carry the death penalty.
 
Mr.
Mancho Bibixy had been arrested on January 19, 2017, while at a friend’s house.
Armed soldiers climbed up the house’s fence while shooting in the air and
forcibly opened two doors. He was arrested and hooded without having a chance
to dress up, take his shoes or his ID card. He was further beaten and taken to
a vehicle.
 
He
is currently detained at the Kondengui central prison, a maximum-security
prison in Yaoundé, where he does not have regular access to his family. Since
the beginning of his detention, his health has deteriorated and has been
further weakened by a hunger strike he started on June 7, 2017 to protest
against his poor detention conditions and which lasted for a week. He is
currently sharing an overcrowded cell with 15 other inmates with poor access to
hygiene facilities and is suffering from back pain.
 
Since the beginning of his trial on February 1, 2017,
hearings have been postponed more than fourteen times, for different reasons
including a request from the Prosecutor, who required more time to gather
evidence, bank holidays and the absence of the judges.  
 

The Observatory fears
that the ongoing judicial harassment against Mr. Mancho Bibixy comes in
retaliation to his peaceful and legitimate human rights activities, in
particular in the context of the Anglophone crisis in Cameroon, in which he has
led several peaceful protests demanding for the rights of the Anglophone
population to be respected[1].

 
Consequently,
the Observatory strongly condemns the arbitrary detention and judicial
harassment of Mr. Mancho Bibixy and urges Cameroonian authorities to
immediately and unconditionally release him as well as to put an end to all
forms of harassment, including at the judicial level, against him.
 
The
Observatory further urges the Cameroon authorities to ensure that, until all
charges are dropped, all judicial proceedings are carried out in full
compliance with his right to a fair trial, as protected under international
law.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities of Cameroon asking them to:
 
              
i.        
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of Mr. Mancho Bibixy, as well as of all human
rights defenders in Cameroon;
 
             
ii.        
Immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Mancho
Bibixy, as well as all human rights defenders detained in Cameroon;
 
           
iii.        
Put an end to all acts of harassment, including at the
judicial level, against Mr. Mancho Bibixy, as well as of all human
rights defenders in Cameroon;
 
            
iv.        
Until all charges are dropped, ensure that all
judicial proceedings against Mr. Mancho Bibixy are carried out in full
compliance with his right to a fair trial, as protected under international
law;
 
             
v.        
Conform in any circumstances with the provisions of
the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the
United Nations General Assembly, in particular its Articles 1 and 12.2.;
 
            
vi.        
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
instruments ratified by Cameroon.

Addresses:
 
His Excellency Mr. Paul Biya,
     President of the Republic, Presidency of the Republic, Palais de l’Unité,
     1000 Yaoundé, Cameroon, Fax +237 22 22 08 70H.E. Mr. Philémon Yang, Prime Minister and Chief
     Head of Government, Primature du Cameroun, 1000 Yaoundé‚ Cameroon. Fax:
     +237 22 23 57 65. Email: spm@spm.gov.cmMr. Laurent Esso, Minister of
     Justice, Ministry of Justice, 1000 Yaoundé‚ Cameroon, Fax: + 237 22 23 00
     05Mr. René Emmanuel Sadi, Minister of
     Territorial Administration, Fax: + 237 22 22 37 35Dr. Chemuta Divine Banda, Chairman of the National Commission on
     Human Rights and Freedoms, Fax: +237 22 22 60 82, E-mail: cndhl@iccnet.cm / cdbanda26@yahoo.frMs. Enonchong Annet, Protection Officer of
     the National Commission on Human Rights and Freedoms, Email: annet_mbeng@yahoo.comH.E. Mr. Anatole Fabien Marie Nkou, Ambassador, Permanent
     Mission of the Republic of Cameroon to the United Nations Office in
     Geneva, Avenue de France 23, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 736 21
     65, Email: mission.cameroun@bluewin.chH.E. Mr. Daniel Evina Abe’e, Ambassador of
     Cameroon to Belgium & the European Union, Embassy of the Republic of
     Cameroon in Brussels, 131 av. Brugmann, 1190 (Forest), Belgium, Fax: + 32 2
     344 57 35; Email: ambassade.cameroun@skynet.be; embassy@cameroon.be




Please
also write to diplomatic representations of Cameroon in your respective
countries.
 
 
***
Geneva-Paris,
April 9, 2018
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the FIDH.
The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations
of repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members
of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
 
·      
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80





 



[1]                      See FIDH Press release, “Death
toll rises in Anglophone regions after severe repression” published on October
8, 2017. 