Side Event: Tunisia: The fight against impunity - a key element for the prevention of torture
March  5, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionEvents / 2015 / MarchSide Event: Tunisia: The fight against impunity - a key element for the prevention of tortureSide event_TUN_10031 page / 1.46 MB




 
Tunisia: The fight against impunity - a key element for the prevention of torture
 
March 10, 2015, 13.30
- 15.00
Room XI, Palais des
Nations
 
Torture
in Tunisia was systematic under the old regime. Four years have passed since
the revolution supposedly brought irreversible progress in the fight against
torture and ill-treatment. However, the use of violence by security agents
continues. Justice has turned a blind eye to these perpetrators and their
accomplices, resulting in widespread impunity. These circumstances jeopardise
the success of Tunisia’s democratic transition.
 
Juan E.
Méndez, Special Rapporteur on Torture, will present the main findings of a
report drawn from a follow-up visit to Tunisia in June 2014. His report will be
presented to the Human Rights Council on 10 March. Tunisia’s Ambassador to the
United Nations and a Commissioner of Tunisia’s Truth and Dignity Commission
will lay out their respective programs and visions to advance the democratic
transition in Tunisia. ACAT and OMCT will review the fight against impunity along
with the main challenges for the new administration in Tunisia.
 
These
interventions will be illustrated by the testimony of Hedi Tlijani, survivor of
torture in Tunisia and member of the organisation INSAF that fights for the rehabilitation
of former military victims of repression.
 
Speakers:
-      
Juan E.
Méndez, Special Rapporteur on torture
-      
Walid Doudech, Ambassador of Tunisia to the United Nations
-      
Oula Ben Nejma, Commissioner of the Truth and Dignity Commission
-      
Hélène Legeay, Responsible for ACAT’s program in Maghreb/Middle East
-      
Hedi Tlijani, Member of the Organisation Insaf
 
Moderation: Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of
OMCT
 
Light refreshments
will be served
Interpretation will
be available 