Turkey:  Call for the release and the end of judicial harassment against lawyers
December 16, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2011 / DecemberTurkey: Call for the release and the end of judicial harassment against lawyers

OPEN LETTER TO THE 
AUTHORITIES
 
Open Letter to Mr. Abdullah Gül, President
and Mr. Sadullah Ergin, Minister of Justice
Republic of Turkey
 

Brussels-Geneva-Ottawa-Paris, December 16, 2011


Re: Call for the release and the end of judicial harassment against 
lawyers

 
Your Excellencies, 
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), the Union Internationale des Avocats (UIA-International Association of Lawyers), the Conférence internationale des barreaux (CIB), Lawyers' Rights Watch Canada (LRWC) and the International 
Foundation for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (Front Line) express 
their deepest concern about the frequent use of arbitrary detention and judicial 
harassment against a significant number of lawyers for merely defending their 
clients' rights in politically sensitive cases. 
 
The most recent and serious incident is the campaign of arrest, 
launched on November 22, 2011, that targeted 39 lawyers and one legal worker in 
the scope of an operation aiming to dismantle an alleged terrorist network known as the Kurdish Communities Union (KCK) - an 
organisation said to be the “urban branch” of the armed Kurdistan Workers Party 
(PKK). They were taken into custody in Istanbul for their alleged membership to 
KCK under charges of “membership of an illegal organisation” and “directing an 
illegal organization”. All were remanded into custody on November 26 or December 
7 after they had been interrogated at the Beşiktaş (Istanbul) Heavy Penal Court 
No. 11. All of them have been involved in the legal representation of imprisoned 
PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan and have been accused of “passing orders of Abdullak 
Ocalan”. The arrests include defence lawyers who are engaged in the main KCK 
trial handled by the Diyarbakır 6th High Criminal Court. The lawyers took a 
stance against the ban of a defence in Kurdish before the Diyarbakır courts as a 
matter of principle and stated that they would not be able to defend their 
clients. Both the lawyers and the Diyarbakır Bar Association were warned several 
times by the court and the prosecutors about “committing a crime”. On December 
5, another lawyer was remanded into custody in the same criminal case. 

 
Today 41 individuals - 40 lawyers and one legal worker - are remanded 
into custody and currently detained in Metris prison are Asya Ülker, 
Aydın Oruç, Bedri Kuran, Cemal Demir, Cemo Tüysüz, 
Davut Uzunköprü, Doğan Erbaş, Fuat Çoşacak, Hüseyin 
Çalışçı, Mehmet Bayraktar, Mehmet Deniz Büyük,
Mehmet Nuri Deniz, Mehmet Sani Kızılkaya, Mensur
Işık, Mizgin Irgat, Muharrem Şahin,
Mehdi Öztüzün, Mustafa Eraslan, Osman Çelik,
Sebahattin Kaya, Serkan Akbaş, Servet Demir, 
Şakir Demir, Şaize Önder, Veysel Vesek, Yaşar
Kaya, Cengiz Çiçek, Faik Özgür Erol, 
Hatice Korkut, İbrahim Bilmez, Ömer Güneş,
Emran Emekçi, Mehmet Sabir Tas, Mahmut
Alınak, Fırat Aydınkaya, Mehmet Ayata, Nevzat
Anuk, Nezahat Paşa Bayraktar, Yalçın Sarıtaş, 
Ümit Sisligün as well as and the secretary of the Century’s Law Bureau’s 
(Asrın Hukuk Bürosu), Ms. Sebahat Zeynep Arat. 

 
Our organisations deplore that cases of judicial harassment against 
lawyers for exercising their mission to provide a defence are not new and that, 
worse, they are becoming frequent. Many lawyers suffer judicial harassment 
because they are identified with their clients or the cause they defend. 
Notably, lawyers who represent clients in anti-terrorism cases, in turn face 
prosecution for terrorism on the basis of the vague provisions on membership, 
support or propaganda. Other lawyers have also suffered harassment due to their 
involvement in the promotion of universal human rights standards. It has been 
the case of lawyer Mr. Muharrem Erbey, General Vice-President of the Human Rights Association (İnsan Haklari Derneği - İHD) and President of its Diyarbakır province branch, who is 
remanded into custody since December 23, 2009, but also of lawyers Mr. 
Hasan Anlar, İHD Deputy Secretary General, Ms. Filiz Kalayci, İHD Executive Committee member, Mr. Halil İbrahim Vargün, İHD former Treasurer, and Mr. Murat Vargün, İHD member, one of the most notorious case, who face a prison 
sentence of between 6 to 15 years of imprisonment as well as others. 

 
The targeting of lawyers occur as other categories of Turkish civil 
society have also been repressed in the scope of the so-called “KCK” operations, including NGO activists, journalists, writers, 
intellectuals, trade unionists, students, teachers, elected officials and 
Kurdish political activists. 
 
As recommended by the Special Rapporteur on the independence of 
judges and lawyers, Ms. Gabriela Carina Knaul de Albuquerque e Silva, in her 
2009 report to General Assembly (UN document A/64/181), “as regards freedom to 
carry out legal work […] authorities [should] cease, with immediate effect, to 
associate lawyers with the interests of their clients and refrain from 
expressing related comments in the public sphere”. 
 
These arrests are contrary to human rights standards which bind 
Turkey. Furthermore, these arrests contravene the “Basic Principles on the Role 
of Lawyers” (Havana Rules) as adopted at the United Nations (UN) in Havana/Cuba 
in 1990. According to these rules, the Government is responsible for ensuring 
that lawyers can carry out their profession without experiencing threats, 
interference, harassment and inappropriate intervention and that lawyers should 
not be associated with the interest of their clients. We call on the Government 
in Turkey to immediately release the lawyers and stop their judicial harassment. 

 
Our organisations are deeply concerned that lawyers in Turkey are 
being prosecuted under terrorism law though their activities are perfectly 
legitimate and should not be considered as crimes. These lawyers have 
significantly and unquestionably contributed to the promotion and protection of 
human rights in general and those of their clients in particular. Therefore, the 
State of Turkey should “take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent 
authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against 
any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, 
pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate 
exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration” in conformity with Article 12.2 of the UN Declaration on Human 
Rights Defenders.
 
Our organisations call upon your Excellencies to ensure that lawyers 
in the Republic of Turkey do not face any act of harassment, in conformity with 
the Universal Declaration on Human Rights,the UN Declaration on Human 
Rights Defenders and the Havana Rules as well as to ensure the respect for human 
rights and fundamental freedoms in all circumstances in accordance with 
international and regional human rights instruments ratified by the Republic of 
Turkey, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and 
the European Convention on Human Rights. 
 
We respectfully thank your Excellencies for your attention in this 
matter and express our sincere hope that your Excellencies will take these 
considerations into account.
 
Yours sincerely,
 
Ms. Souhayr Belhassen, 
FIDH President
Ms. Gail Davidson, LRWC Executive Director
Mr. Gerald Staberock, 
OMCT Secretary General
Mr. Mario Stasi, CIB Secretary General
Mr. Driss Chater, UIA President
Ms. Mary Lawlor, Front Line Director 