Working for Change, No. 1  A Practical Guide to Acting Against the Economic, Social and Cultural Root Causes of Torture and Other Forms of Violence through Action Files
September  2, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Reports and Publications / 2010 / SeptemberWorking for Change, No. 1  A Practical Guide to Acting Against the Economic, Social and Cultural Root Causes of Torture and Other Forms of Violence through Action FilesPractical Guide to Acting through Action Files 30 pages / 185 KBThis publication is intended as a practical
guide to help NGOs effectively address the economic, social and cultural root
causes of torture and other forms of violence by preparing and disseminating
communications or “Action Files”.

 
Action Files aim at halting or
preventing torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, summary or
arbitrary executions, forced disappearances, violence against women and
violence against children and other forms of violence. This is done by calling
for preventive and/or remedial action in relation to situations, policies or
projects involving violations of economic, social and cultural rights that
cause violence or that present a real and substantial risk of causing violence.
In turn, ending violence can lead to an increase in the enjoyment of economic,
social and cultural rights.
 
Action Files are prepared in
cooperation with national NGOsincluding members of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) SOS-Torture Network. They include
recommendations for specific action, are sent to the competent United Nations
Special Procedures mandate holders and to government authorities with direct
responsibility for taking action. In addition, international financial and
development institutions, the European Union, trans-national corporations and
banks are seized when they are involved in projects that cause or risk causing
violence. 
 
Action Files are also sent to the
members of the SOS-Torture Network (some 290 national NGOs) and other NGOs
belonging OMCT’s network on economic, social and cultural rights along with
requests for supportive action on their part. In addition, the information and
recommendations developed in connection with these interventions can be
included in alternative reports to United Nations (UN) Treaty Bodies[1] and submitted
to other procedures, for example the Human Rights Council’s Universal Periodic
Review of respect for human rights by UN Member States and to the institutions
of the European Union.  
 
OMCT has prepared a PowerPoint presentation on
using action files “OMCT Action files on ESCR”. For more information and
copies of all OMCT action files, see Bringing about change through Action
Files .
 
If you require further support, or are
interested in working directly with the OMCT secretariat on this issue, please
contact:
OMCT, P.O. Box 21, 1211
Geneva 8,
Switzerland, tel.: +41 (0)22 8094939,
e-mail: omct@omct.orgPlease mention “ESCR Action Files”.


[1] See the companion guide “Working
for Change, No. 2 A Practical Guide to
Preparing Alternative Reports to United Nations Treaty Bodies addressing the
Economic, Social and Cultural Root Causes of Violence” http://escr.omct.org 