Uruguay:   Open letter to Mr Jose Mujica, President of Uruguay: OMCT’s concern about the situation of children and adolescents deprived of their liberty in Uruguay
October  4, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / Uruguay / 2010 / OctoberUruguay:  Open letter to Mr Jose Mujica, President of Uruguay: OMCT’s concern about the situation of children and adolescents deprived of their liberty in Uruguay
Open letter  to Mr Jose Mujica
President
of Uruguay
 
 
 
Mr José Alberto Mujica,
President of Uruguay
Montevideo, URUGUAY
Via: Permanent mission of Uruguay in Geneva
Fax: 022.731.56.50
Email: mission.uruguay@urugi.ch
 
 
Geneva, October 4, 2010
 
 
Re: OMCT’s concern about the
situation of children and adolescents deprived of their liberty in Uruguay 
 
 
Your
Excellency,

The World Organisation against Torture (OMCT), which coordinates the
SOS-Torture network – the largest international network of NGOs fighting
against torture, summary executions, forced disappearances and all other forms
of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment – is writing to express its deep
concern about the situation of children and adolescents deprived of their
liberty in Uruguay.

Although OMCT recognises that Uruguay is one of the most cooperative countries
in debating and defending children's rights globally, it considers the
situation to be very different where implementing recommendations issued by
international human rights mechanisms is concerned - in particular with regard
to children in conflict with the law. In spite of recommendations made by a
number of these mechanisms in recent years (by the Special Rapporteur on
Torture, the Universal Periodic Review, the Committee on the Rights of the
Child), the situation of children and adolescents deprived of their liberty has
not improved; OMCT can confirm that it has, on the contrary, worsened.

Mr President, on the basis of information received from the Instituto de
Estudios Legales y Sociales del Uruguay (IELSUR – a member of OMCT's
SOS-Torture network), OMCT has observed a political shift towards the
repression of children in conflict with the law. OMCT, in addition to concerns
expressed in recent months (an oral declaration before the UN Human Rights
Council and the May 2010 Mission), wishes to draw your attention to two
pressing matters.

Firstly, OMCT expresses deep concern about various changes to the legislature's
agenda affecting children and adolescents in conflict with the law. According
to information received from IELSUR, some legislators are proposing lowering
the minimum age of criminal responsibility from 18 to 16, increasing prison
sentences for children and adolescents deprived of their liberty from 5 to 10
years and repealing article 222 of the Children and Adolescents' Code which
stipulates that criminal records of children should be scrapped when they turn
18.

OMCT reminds you that all these modifications breach international standards on
children's rights, such as article 37b of the UN Convention on the Rights of
the Child which states that deprivation of liberty may only be used as a last
resort and must be for the shortest possible length of time. Furthermore, the
UN Committee on the Rights of the Child has consistently stated that all
under-18s, from the moment that they are alleged to have committed an offence,
must receive treatment which is in conformity with juvenile justice standards.

In addition, OMCT expresses alarm over plans to house children deprived of
their liberty in container-like cells which signals declining detention
conditions and a refusal in this way to guarantee children's rights. 

OMCT urges Your Excellency to make the most of your office's prestige and the
unanimous respect that you enjoy on a personal level to prevent the adoption of
a more repressive law on the detention of children and adolescents in conflict
with the law, and to prevent the approval of plans to imprison children in
containers. In this respect, in order to avoid overcrowding in detention
centres and the consequent poor conditions, we suggest that files are reviewed
with the aim of identifying children whose sentences could be reduced. 

Secondly, OMCT draws your attention to a number of cases of abuse of children
and adolescents deprived of their liberty which have occurred this year and of
which we have been notified by IELSUR. OMCT is particularly concerned about a
number of teenage girls deprived of their liberty in the Centro Femenino de
Detención de Montevideo, who were victims of rape and sexual abuse carried out
at night on multiple occasions. In this respect, OMCT has received information
that the centre's director, having been informed of the facts, refused to make
them public and delayed an investigation. It has also come to our attention
that various officials at the centre who reported these violations are now
suffering harassment at work. OMCT expresses serious concern that the officer
accused of these violations was allowed to return to work at the centre and to
resume contact with the girls the following week. 
Your
Excellency, OMCT urges you to order the authorities concerned to carry out an
effective, exhaustive, independent and impartial investigation into the rape of
these girls deprived of their liberty to identify those responsible. The
outcome of the investigation must be made public and the perpetrators must be
brought before a competent, independent and impartial court and sanctioned as
stipulated by law. OMCT also requests that the victims be granted an effective
remedy and appropriate reparation, including compensation and rehabilitation.Finally,
OMCT encourages you to adopt without delay the most suitable measures to
guarantee the security, protection and rights of all children and adolescents
deprived of their liberty in Uruguay, in addition to the recommendations
pronounced on this issue by treaty bodies and other UN human rights mechanisms.Your
Excellency, Mr President, trusting in your respect for human rights, we would
be grateful if you could give attention to this matter and hope that you will
take our requests into account. 
Eric Sottas,Secretary General
 
 
Copy:
- Ministro del Interior:
Sr. Eduardo Bonomi
- Presidente del INAU:
Sr. Alejandro Javier Salsamendi Ferreira
- Presidente del
Parlamento: Sra. Lucía Topolansky
- Presidente de la Cámara
de Representantes: Sra. Ivonne Passada
- Presidente de la Cámara
de Senadores: Sr.Danilo Astori
- Presidente de la Corte
Suprema de Justicia: Dr. Jorge Omar Chediak Gonzales 