Bahrain:  Ongoing arbitrary detention and judicial harassment against Mr. Nabeel Rajab
October 29, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2014 / OctoberBahrain: Ongoing arbitrary detention and judicial harassment against Mr. Nabeel Rajab

 
New Information
BHR 001 / 0812 / OBS
048.10
Arbitrary detention /
Judicial harassment
Bahrain
October 29, 2014
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Bahrain.
 
New
information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing arbitrary
detention and judicial harassment against Mr. Nabeel Rajab, President of the
Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR), Director of the Gulf Centre for Human
Rights (GCHR) and FIDH Deputy Secretary General[1]. 
 
According the information
received, on October 29, 2014, the Third Lower Criminal Court resumed the trial
against Mr. Nabeel Rajab on a charge of “insulting a public institution” via
Twitter, pursuant to Article 216 of the Bahraini Penal Code, an offence
punishable by up to three years of imprisonment. The charges concern various
tweets posted on Nabeel Rajab's account, which the Public Prosecution has
deemed as insulting to the Ministry of Interior and the Bahraini Defence
Forces. During the hearing, the presiding judge decided to hear the case in
camera and summonsed Mr. Nabeel Rajab and his lawyer in his office. The judge
informed Mr. Rajab that he had decided to change the charge as follows:
“insulting a public institution and the armed forces” as the armed forces could
not be considered under law as a public institution”. He also rejected the
request for the provisional release of Mr. Rajab. The hearing was then again
adjourned to November 2.
 
The
Observatory strongly deplores the arbitrary detention and judicial harassment
against Mr. Rajab, and considers it as a reprisal to sanction his legitimate
human rights activities. Mr. Rajab had just returned to Bahrain following an
international advocacy tour at the United Nations and European Union. 
 
Mr. Rajab
has recently been released from prison after completing a two year sentence
(see background information). In another case, he had already been tried on
similar charges in relation to tweets deemed to be insulting to the Ministry of
Interior, before being acquitted.
 
In 2013, the
United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (UN WGAD) had found that
Mr. Rajab's detention was arbitrary, following a previous conviction related to
his freedom of opinion, expression and assembly. The UN WGAD had concluded that
the « domestic laws of Bahrain (…) seem to
deny persons the basic right to freedom of opinion, expression »
 
The
Observatory calls for the immediate and unconditional release of Mr. Nabeel Rajab,
as his arbitrary detention and judicial harassment merely aim at hindering his
human rights activities. The Observatory more
generally urges the Bahraini authorities to put an end to all acts of
harassment – including at the judicial level – against Mr. Rajab, and to comply
with the relevant international norms and standards, in particular the United
Nations (UN) Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General
Assembly on December 9, 1998, and international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Bahrain.
 
Background
information:
 
On
July 9, 2012, Mr. Nabeel Rajab was arrested by masked police officers at his
house[2]
after he had tweeted the following on June 2: "Khalifa,
leave the residents of Al Muharraq, its Sheikhs and its elderly. Everyone knows
that you are not popular here, and if it wasn't for the subsidies, they
wouldn't have gone out to welcome you. When will you step down?".
 
On
the same day, the 5th Lower Criminal Court sentenced Mr. Rajab to three months
imprisonment for allegedly libelling the residents of Al Muharraq through
tweets posted on his twitter account. On August 23, 2012, Mr. Nabeel Rajab was
acquitted by the Higher Appeal Court. 
 
On
August 16, 2012, the Lower Criminal Court had also sentenced Mr. Nabeel Rajab
to three years imprisonment. Mr. Rajab appeared before the Court for three
cases related to his participation in pacific gatherings in favour of
fundamental freedoms and democracy:
 
-
The first case related to charges of “participating in an illegal assembly” and
“calling others to join”, in relation to a protest organised on March 31, 2012
in Manama to denounce the detention of the founder of GCHR, former President of
the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR), and former MENA Director at Front
Line, Mr. Abdulhadi Al Khawaja.
 
-
The second one related to on charges
of “involvement in illegal practices and incitement to gatherings and
calling for unauthorised marches through social networking sites” for a protest
in Manama on January 12, 2012.
 
-
The third one on related to charges of “participating in an illegal assembly”
in relation to several protests that took place in Manama in February 2012.
 
The
Court thus sentenced Mr. Nabeel Rajab to one year imprisonment for each of
these three cases. In December 2012, the Appeals Court reduced the sentence to
two years imprisonment. Mr. Nabeel Rajab completed his sentence and was
released in June 2014. 
 
On October 1, 2014, Mr.
Nabeel Rajab was summoned by the General Directorate of Anti-corruption and
Economic and Electronic Security of the Criminal Investigation Department on
charge of “insulting a public institution” via Twitter. The investigation
concerned certain tweets he published on Twitter, which the CID alleged were
insulting the Ministry of Interior, pursuant to Article 216 of the Bahraini
Penal Code[3].
If convicted, he could face up to three years imprisonment. The CID decided to
detain Mr. Rajab overnight before presenting him to the Public Prosecution on
October 2 for further investigation. The Public
Prosecution decided to keep Mr. Rajab under arrest for 7 days, pending further
investigations. 
 
On October
9, 2014, Mr. Nabeel Rajab was brought again before the Public
Prosecution Officer in Manama and informed that the Ministry of Defence had
filed a complaint regarding the same tweet, which is the subject matter of the
previous investigation. The interrogation lasted about 40 minutes. 
 
Mr. Rajab reiterated his
previous position denying all allegations against him and stressing that he was
only exercising his freedom of expression in regard to a matter forming part of
a large public debate and an open discussion in the local press, social
networks and even in Bahraini officials’ public statements. 
 
The same day the Public
Prosecution ordered the continued detention of Mr. Nabeel Rajab and decided to
refer the case for trial before the Third Lower Criminal Court. 
 
On October 19, 2014, the
Third Lower Criminal Court started the trial against Mr. Nabeel Rajab. The
hearing was then suspended to October 29 for the verdict.
 
Actions
requested: 

The Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to: 
 
i.      Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Nabeel Rajab
and all human rights defenders in Bahrain;
 
ii.     Release Mr. Nabeel Rajab
immediately and unconditionally as his detention is arbitrary since it seems to
merely sanction his human rights activities;
 
iii.  
Put an end to any act of
harassment, including at the judicial level, against Mr. Nabeel Rajab and
against all human rights defenders in Bahrain;


iv.   
Conform
in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly,
in particular: 
            - its
Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually or in
association         with others, to
promote the protection and realization of human rights and        fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels” ;
-       
its Article 6 (c) which
states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others to study, discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law
and in practice, of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through
these and other appropriate means, to draw public attention to those
matters” ;
-       
and its Article 12.2
which states that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
present Declaration”.
 
vi.   Ensure in all circumstances respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by Bahrain. 


Addresses: 
·      
Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of
Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 587
·      
Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA,
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tel: +973 172 27 555; Fax : +973 172 12 6032 
·      
Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister
of Justice and Islamic Affairs, Tel: +973 175 31 333; Fax: +973 175 31 284 
·      
Lt. Gen. Cheikh Rashed bin Abdulla AL KHALIFA,
Minister of Interior, Tel: +973  17572222 and +973 17390000. Email: info@interior.gov.bh
·      
Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the United
Nations in Geneva, 1 chemin Jacques-Attenville, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, CP 39,
1292 Chambésy, Switzerland. Fax:
+ 41 22 758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch 
 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of
Bahrain in your respective countries.
 
[1]                 Mr. Rajab is also a member
of the Advisory Committee of Human Rights Watch's Middle East Division  and Chair of CARAM Asia. 


[2]            https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nENlacyy3Sw&feature=youtu.be


[3]           Article 216 provides that: “A person
shall be liable for imprisonment or payment of a fine if he offends by any
method of expression the National Assembly, or other constitutional
institutions, the army, law courts, authorities or government agencies”. 