Syrian Arab Republic:  Free Human Rights Lawyer Khalil Ma’touq Held for 4 Years
October  4, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2016 / OctoberSyrian Arab Republic: Free Human Rights Lawyer Khalil Ma’touq Held for 4 Years

Renewed calls for Khalil Ma’touq’s
release on 4th anniversary of detention

(Geneva, New York, October 04, 2016)
– Syria should immediately release the Human Rights Lawyer Khalil Ma’touq and his
assistant, Mohamed
Thatha, 31 human rights organizations said today, on the fourth anniversary
of their enforced disappearance. 
 
On October 2, 2012, the two
men are believed to have been arrested at a government-operated checkpoint on
their way from Ma’touq’s home in the Damascus suburb of Sahnaya to his office
in Damascus.  Despite repeated requests
for information to the public prosecutor’s office in Damascus in 2012 and 2013
by family and colleagues, Syrian authorities have denied that they arrested the
men. 
 
Despite these denials, individuals
released from the government’s custody in 2015 have informed Ma’touq’s family
that while in detention they spotted him in various government-operated
detention facilities, including State Security Branch 285 and Military
Intelligence Branch 235 in Damascus. Since then, the family has not received
any information on his whereabouts.  
 
Detention centers operated by the Syrian
government’s security forces are appalling, with rampant torture and inhumane
conditions, in which many thousands of detainees have died since 2011. Former
detainees at Branch 235, where Ma’touq was reported to have been seen in 2015,
said that they were held in poor conditions in crowded cells with inadequate
access to food, water and hygienic facilities. One detainee, who cannot be identified for security reasons, told that approximately five
men from his cell died each day as a consequence of torture or disease. 
 
The organizations expressed grave concern
that being held in such conditions may place Ma’touq’s life at risk. Ma’touq
suffers from advanced lung disease, for which he requires appropriate
medication and medical care, but which it is feared he has not received
according to some local reports. 
 
It is not clear why the men were
arrested, but it is likely related to Ma’touq’s longstanding work as a human
rights lawyer specializing in defending political prisoners. He is also the
director of the Syrian Center for Legal Studies and Research.
 
Ma’touq and Thatha have not been released
despite calls by human rights activists and organizations to end the practices
of enforced disappearances and torture and other ill-treatment in detention
facilities in Syria. UN Security Council Resolution 2139 of February 2014
demanded the release of all those arbitrarily detained, a call reiterated by a
UN Security Council Presidential Statement on August 17, 2015. 
 
Thousands of
people have been detained or disappeared since the beginning of the conflict in
Syria. Many of them are peaceful activists, humanitarian and journalists. 
An enforced disappearance
occurs when someone is deprived of their liberty by agents of the state or
those acting with its acquiescence, followed by a refusal to acknowledge the
deprivation of liberty or by concealment of the fate or whereabouts of the
disappeared person.
 
The Syrian authorities should heed these
calls without further delay and immediately and unconditionally release Ma’touq
and Thatha, as well as all others detained solely for the peaceful exercise of
their human rights. The UN Security Council should ensure the effective and
immediate implementation of UN Resolution 2139. 
 
The undersigned organizations also call
on the USA and Russia to pressure the Syrian government – and all other parties
to the conflict who have detention facilities in Syria – to grant independent
international monitors unhindered access to all persons deprived of their
liberty. 
 
List of signatories: 
1.    
Amnesty
International (AI)
2.    
Arab Foundation for Development and Citizenship3.   Arabic
Network for Human Rights Information (ANHRI)
4.     Bahrain Center for Human
Rights (BCHR)
5.     English PEN
6.    
EuroMed
Rights (EMHRN)
7.    
Front
Line Defenders (FLD)
8.    
Gulf
Centre for Human Rights (GCHR)
9.    
Human Rights Watch (HRW)
10.    
Initiative Association for the Defense of Freedoms and
Human Rights in Algeria
11.  International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH),
within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders
12.  International Service for
Human Rights (ISHR)
13.  Iraqi Association for the
Defence of Journalists’ Rights (IJRDA)
14.  Lawyers for Lawyers
15.   Lawyer's
Rights Watch Canada (LRWC)16. Maharat Foundation
17.  Metro Centre to Defend
Journalists in Iraqi Kurdistan
18. 
Nadim
Center for Rehabilitation of Victims of Violence
19. 
PAX
20.  PEN International21 Sisters' Arab Forum for Human
Rights (SAF)
22.  SKeyes Center for Media and
Cultural Freedom
23.  Syrian Center for Legal Studies and Research
24.  Syrian Center for Media and
Freedom of Expression (SCM)
25.  Syria Justice &
Accountability Center (SJAC) 
26.  Syrian Network for Human Rights (SNHR)
27. 
Syrians
for Truth and Justice (STJ)
28.  Tunisian
Association for the Defense of university values
29.  Vigilance Association for Democracy & Civil State in Tunis
30.  Vivarta
31. 
World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders 