Viet Nam:  Trial against three pro-democracy bloggers to open on September 24
September 21, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Viet Nam / 2012 / SeptemberViet Nam: Trial against three pro-democracy bloggers to open on September 24

  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

 
JOINT PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

 
VIET NAM: Trial
against three pro-democracy bloggers to open on September 24
 
Bangkok-Paris-Geneva, September 21, 2012. The Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), together with the Vietnam Committee on Human Rights (VCHR), are deeply
concerned at the judicial action against three pro-democracy bloggers. The trial against Mr. Nguyen Van Hai (aka Dieu Cay), Mr. Phan Thanh
Hai and Ms. Ta Phong Tan before the Ho Chi Minh City People’s Court is due to
start on September 24, 2012, after several postponements.
 
On September 15, 2012, Dieu Cay's lawyer
was officially notified that Ms. Ta Phong Tan and Messrs. Dieu Cay and
Phan Thanh Hai would be tried on September 24, 2012. The three outspoken
bloggers were charged with “conducting propaganda against the state” under
Article 88.2 of the Criminal Code that has been frequently used to criminalise
peaceful criticisms. If convicted, the bloggers could be sentenced to up to 20
years' imprisonment.
 
The trial has been re-scheduled on several
occasions (April and August 2012). Meanwhile Dieu Cay has been in prison
pending his trial for 23 months[1].
Mr. Phan Thanh Hai and Ms. Ta Phong Tan have also been in pre-trial detention
in Ho Chi Minh City for 23 and 12 months respectively. This prolonged pre-trial
detention is a violation of national and international law, including Article
120 of the Vietnamese Criminal Procedures Code[2].
 
The Observatory and VCHR are extremely
concerned that the bloggers will not receive a fair trial. In addition, the
family of Dieu Cay has been put under pressure. Indeed, in the afternoon of
September 16, 2012, Dieu Cay's ex wife, who is a sister of Ms. Ta Phong Tan,
was reportedly arrested and interrogated at the police station on accusations
of causing a traffic incident after she got out of the taxi that drove her to a
ceremony to commemorate the 49-day of her mother's death. The same day, Dieu
Cay's ex wife was also assaulted by thugs in front of the police. It is to be
recalled that on July 30, 2012, her mother, Ms. Dang Thi Kim Lieng, immolated
herself outside the People’s Committee headquarters in Bac Lieu to protest
against Ms. Ta Phong Tan’s unfair imprisonment.
 
Dieu Cay, one of the founders of the Club
of Free Journalists, is known for his writings calling for greater respect for
human rights and democratic reforms. He is also known for his criticisms of China’s
claims over disputed islands in the South China Sea. In January 2008,  Dieu Cay and other activists staged an
anti-China demonstration in Ho Chi Minh City. Before their arrests, Phan Tan
Hai had published a number of articles on his blog, including one that
criticised and called for the repeal of Article 88 of the Criminal Code, while
Ms. Tan had blogged about police abuse and violations of human rights by the
State. 
 
This crackdown on Internet activists has
been continuous since 2008, including numerous arbitrary arrests and detentions[3].
In addition, the Vietnamese government has drafted a new Decree on Management,
Provision, and Use of Internet Services and Information on the Network that, if
passed in its current form, would grant the authorities expansive discretionary
power to censor, control and possibly criminalise Internet use in Viet Nam.
Moreover, last week, Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung ordered a crack down on
three prominent blogs advocating for pro human rights and pro democratic reforms
and denouncing corruption cases and called for the arrest of those associated
with these sites. In June 2012, the UN Human Rights Council adopted by
consensus a resolution affirming that the right to freedom of expression
on-line must be protected, and called on States to “promote and facilitate
access to the Internet”.
 
The Observatory reiterates its call on the
representatives of the diplomatic and international community in Hanoi to send
observers to the trial of the three bloggers and to publicly and privately urge
Viet Nam to drop all charges against Ms. Ta Phong Tan, Mr. Nguyen Van Hai (Dieu
Cay) and Mr. Phan Thanh Hai, and release them immediately and unconditionally.
 
Press
contact:
VCHR: Vo
Tran Nhat: +33 1 45 98 30 85
FIDH:   Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18
OMCT: Isabelle Scherer: +41 22 809 49 39



[1]                
Dieu Cay was previously convicted on trumped-up charges of ‘tax evasion’ after
a manifestly unfair and closed trial in 2009. His current prolonged detention
began on October 19, 2010, the same day he completed the prison term he
received in 2009. 


[2]                 Under Article 120 of the Vietnamese
Criminal Procedures Code, pre-trial detention is limited to four months for
"very serious" offenses. It may be extended three times for
especially serious offences, and a fourth time in case it concerns a
"national security" crime.


[3]                
See Observatory/VCHR non-exhaustive list of human rights defenders in detention
or under house arrest (January 2012): http://www.fidh.org/Viet-Nam-EU-Release-of-rights-and / http://www.omct.org/human-rights-defenders/urgent-interventions/viet-nam/2012/01/d21585/. See also Joint Press
Release issued on August 1, 2012. For more general  information, see also the list of 180
political and religious prisoners submitted by the VCHR to the UN Human Rights
Council in September 2012: http://www.queme.net/eng/doc/VCHR_List_of_180_Prisoners_of_Political_and_Religious_Prisoners_in_Vietnam_September_2012.pdf 