Turkey:  Turkey: death in detention of Mr. Yunus Güzel
November  2, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2001 / NovemberTurkey: Turkey: death in detention of Mr. Yunus GüzelCase TUR 021101 Torture / Death in detention    The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Turkey.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source of the suspect death of Mr. Yunus Güzel on October 23rd, 2001 while in detention at police headquarters in Istanbul, Turkey.  According to the information received, Mr. Güzel, a 32 year old member of the Revolutionary People’s Liberation Front, was reportedly taken into custody on October, 16th, 2001 by the Istanbul Security Directorate under allegations that he was preparing a suicide attack on behalf of the Revolutionary People’s Liberation Front (DHKP/C). On October 23rd, 2001, Mr. Güzel was found dead in his detention cell located in the Anti-Terror branch of the Istanbul Security Directorate.  The authorities stated that Mr. Güzel’s committed suicide, claiming that he used his bed sheets to hang himself from his bunk bed, which he had allegedly moved into an up-right position. According to our sources, the authorities’ suicide explanation is questionable, as it is known that within these detention facilities, the beds are bolted to the floor and detainees are not given bed sheets.  According to the information received, fellow detainees Mahmut Polat, Esra Üçgüzel and Perihan Demirkýran - who were also under detention with Mr. Yunus Güzel - stated that Mr. Güzel was repeatedly interrogated and forced to give statements under torture.  A photograph also published on October 30th, 2001 in local paper “Evrensel,” reportedly shows bruises and other torture marks on Mr. Güzel’s body.  According to the information received, on October 25, 2001, the Human Rights Association (IHD) and Research Foundation for Social Jurisprudence (TOHAV) requested that an investigation be launched by the Chief Public Prosecutor’s Office in Istanbul into the circumstances of Mr. Güzel’s death.  To date, there is no information indicating that progress has been made in this investigation.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned Mr. Güzel’s death in detention, as well as the alleged use of torture by Istanbul Security Directorate officials. Moreover, OMCT is gravely concerned about Turkey’s continuing use of torture, and the impunity enjoyed by the perpetrators of these acts.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Turkey urging them to:  i.   guarantee an immediate investigation into the alleged torture and death in detention of Mr. Yunus Güzel, including an autopsy to identify the causes of his death, identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; ii.  guarantee adequate reparation to Mr. Güzel’s family; iii. guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	Minister of Interior, Mr Saadettin Tantan, Içisleri Bakanligi, 06644 Ankara, Turkey. Fax: + 90 312 418 17 95. ·	Minister of Justice, Prof Hikmet Sami Türk, Ministry of Justice, Adalet Bakanligi, 06659 Ankara, Turkey. Fax: + 90 312 417 3954 / 418 5667 ·	State Minister with responsibility for Human Rights, Mr Rüstü Kazim Yücelen, Office of the Prime Minister, Basbakanlik, 06573 Ankara, Turkey. Fax: + 90 312 417 0476  Please also write to the embassies of Turkey in your respective country.  Geneva, November 2nd, 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 