Cuba:  Release and subsequent re-arrest of Messrs. Zaqueo Báez Guerrero and Ismael Bonet Reñé as well as Ms. María Josefa Acón Sardiñas, and arrest of aproximately 70 members of the Ladies in White
November 18, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cuba / 2015 / NovemberCuba: Release and subsequent re-arrest of Messrs. Zaqueo Báez Guerrero and Ismael Bonet Reñé as well as Ms. María Josefa Acón Sardiñas, and arrest of aproximately 70 members of the Ladies in White
URGENT
APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY 




New
information

CUB
001 / 1015 / OBS 090.1

Arbitrary
detention / Judicial harassment

Cuba

November
18, 2015


The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Cuba.



New
information:


The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the release
and subsequent re-arrest of members of the Patriotic Union of Cuba
(UNPACU) Messrs. Zaqueo
Báez Guerrero and
Ismael Bonet Reñé as
well as
Ms.
María
Josefa Acón Sardiñas,
also member of the Ladies in White, a peaceful protest group founded
by female relatives of Cuban political prisoners. 



According
to the information received, on November 9, 2015, Messrs. Zaqueo Báez
Guerrero, Ismael Bonet Reñé
and Ms.
María Josefa Acón Sardiñas were released from preventive
detention. The
three human rights defenders had been detained in Havana at the
Centro
de Detención Policial 100 y Aldabó
since
September 20, 2015 (see background information). Nonetheless,
they remain judicially harassed by the Cuban authorities and charged
with “contempt”,
“public disorder” and “resistance”. As of issuing this urgent
appeal, no court hearing was set yet. 




According
to the same information, on November 15, 2015,  Messrs. Zaqueo Báez
Guerrero, Ismael Bonet Reñé
and Ms.
María Josefa Acón Sardiñas were re-arrested in Havana after
participating in a peaceful demonstration under the
slogan “We All March” (#TodosMarchamos”). 




Approximately
70 members of the Ladies in White were also arrested during the
demonstration including Mss. Leticia
Ramos Herreria,
Annia
Abascal Zamora,
Sisy
Abascal Zamora,
Mercedes
López Suárez
and Marisol
Fernández Socorro,
members from the Matanzas Province. The 5 women human rights
defenders, who were released at late evening hours on Sunday 15 in a
location they denounced as dangerous, were  threatened
by a female State Security officer who warned them that if they
travelled once more from Matanzas to Havana, they would be charged
with contempt, disobedience, disorderly conduct and infringement
(atentado). 




The
Observatory condemns the re-arrest of Messrs.
Zaqueo Báez Guerrero, Ismael Bonet Reñé and
Ms.
María Josefa Acón Sardiñas,
and strongly deplores the ongoing judicial harassment against them.
The Observatory calls upon the Cuban authorities to immediately and
unconditionally drop all charges against them as they only aim at
sanctioning their human rights activities.



The
Observatory further
condemns the arrest of approximately
70 members of the Ladies in White  including
Mss. Leticia
Ramos Herreria, Annia Abascal Zamora, Sisy Abascal Zamora, Mercedes
López Suárez and Marisol Fernández Socorro and calls on the Cuban
authorities to respect the legitimate activities of human rights
defenders including the human right to freedom of peaceful assembly.



Background
information:



On
September 20, 2015, Messrs.
Zaqueo Báez Guerrero, Ismael Bonet Reñé and
Ms.
María Josefa Acón Sardiñas,
along with other activists, were arrested while trying to approach
Pope Francis in his car in Havana on his way to the mass he was
giving, and dragged away by security personnel at Havana's Revolution
Square. Their intention was apparently to raise awareness over human
rights violations and the increasing repression against Ladies in
White, UNPACU, and other groups in Cuba. 




These
arbitrary detentions have been part of genuine wave of political and
social repression that led to several “preventive detentions”
that took place around Pope Francis' visit, as denounced by Cuban
human rights organisations. Activists have been arrested and detained
by the authorities to prevent them from attending papal ceremonies. 


Actions
requested:




Please
write to the authorities of Cuba asking them to:



i.
Immediately and unconditionally drop all charges against Messrs.
Zaqueo Báez Guerrero, Ismael Bonet Reñé and
Ms.
María Josefa Acón Sardiñas
as they are targeted solely for their legitimate human rights
activities;


ii.
Put an end to all forms of harassment, including at the judicial
level, against Messrs. Zaqueo
Báez Guerrero, Ismael Bonet Reñé
and
Mss. María
Josefa Acón Sardiñas, Leticia
Ramos Herreria, Annia Abascal Zamora, Sisy Abascal Zamora, Mercedes
López Suárez, Marisol Fernández Socorro,
as well as against all human rights defenders in the country;



iii.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological
integrity of Messrs. Zaqueo
Báez Guerrero, Ismael Bonet Reñé
and
Mss. María
Josefa Acón Sardiñas, Leticia
Ramos Herreria, Annia Abascal Zamora, Sisy Abascal Zamora, Mercedes
López Suárez, Marisol Fernández Socorro
as well as of all human rights defenders in Cuba;




iv.
Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on
December 9, 1998, in particular with:




article
	1, which states that "everyone has the right, individually or
	collectively, to promote the protection and fulfilment of human
	rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international
	levels", 






article
	6(a), which foresees that “everyone has the right, individually
	and in association with others, to participate in peaceful
	activities against violations of human rights and fundamental
	freedoms”;, 






as
	well as article 12.2, which provides that "the State shall take
	all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent
	authorities of everyone, individually or in association with others,
	against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure
	adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
	consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred
	to in the present Declaration";





v.
Guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other
international human rights instruments signed or ratified by Cuba.




Addresses:




Mr.
	Raúl Castro Ruz, President of the Council of State of Cuba, La
	Habana, Cuba, Código Postal 10400, Fax: + 53 7 8333085 (through the
	Ministry of Foreign Affairs), E-mail: f_castro@cuba.gov.cu
Dr.
	Darío Delgado Cura, Attorney General of the Republic of Cuba,
	Avenida 1ra, No. 1801 e/ 18 y 20. Reparto Miramar, municipio Playa,
	CP 11 300, La Habana, Cuba, Tel: +53 7 206 9090.

Mr.
	Bruno Eduardo Rodriguez Parrilla, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Calle
	G, No. 360 Vedado, Plaza de la Revolución La Habana, Cuba, Fax:+ 53
	7 836 4500, 8333 085, E-mail: cubaminrex@minrex.gov.cu

General
	Abelardo Colomé Ibarra, Minister of Interior, Plaza de la
	Revolución, La Habana, Cuba, Fax: + 53 7 855 6621 + 53 7 8301 566,
	Correo- E: correominint@mn.mn.co.cu
Permanent
	Mission of Cuba to the United Nations in Geneva, 100 chemin de
	Valérie, 1292 Chambésy, Fax: + 41 22 758 9431 E-mail:
	embacubaginebra@missioncuba.ch

Embassy
	of Cuba in Brussels, 77 rue Roberts Jones, 1180 Uccle, Belgium, Fax
	: + 32 2 344 9661, E-mail: mision@embacuba.be





Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Cuba in your
respective countries.




***




Paris-Geneva,
November 18, 2015




Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in
your reply.




The
Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection
of human rights defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in
their time of need.




To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 

E-mail:
	Appeals@fidh-omct.org



Tel
	and fax FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80

Tel
	and fax OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29 