HRDN Stand 4 Human Rights Defenders Campaign: Second Featured case: David Ravelo
February 10, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Colombia / 2016 / FebruaryHRDN Stand 4 Human Rights Defenders Campaign: Second Featured case: David RaveloColombia_Ravelo case2 pages / 153 KB​The Human Rights and Democracy Network (HRDN), of which OMCT is a 
member, presents the second featured case of a human rights defender, in the framework of its one year-long campaign: Stand 4 Human Rights Defenders. HRDN is an informal group of 48 NGOs operating at the EU level in the areas of human rights, democracy and peace building.Description of the case

                David Ravelo, a prominent Colombian human rights 
defender, has to this date served five of the more than 18 years of 
prison he was condemned to, for allegedly plotting the murder of a 
Colombian public official in 1991.
				

				The process was plagued with irregularities:
The accusation against David Ravelo was based on the testimony of 
incarcerated paramilitaries, one of which is currently being prosecuted 
for false testimony. The public prosecutor in the case was a former lieutenant in the 
Colombian National Police who had been suspended for his alleged 
involvement in the forced disappearance of a young man in 1991, which 
according to Colombian law should have prevented him from working as 
Prosecutor.


Human Rights Situation in Colombia
The Peace talks between the Colombian Government and the FARC 
guerilla have recently significantly reduced the level of violence 
related to the armed conflict, but according to statistics both from the
 UN and NGOs the number of killings of HRDs in 2015 was higher than the 
average over the last twenty years.				
				


International actions related to Ravelo's proceedings and sentence

In 2011, two UN Special Rapporteurs expressed their concerns regarding 
how “the criminalization of Ravelo Crespo would lead to an increase in 
miscarriage of justice cases against human rights defenders in 
Colombia”.
Since he has been detained, the Embassies of Germany, Netherlands, 
France, Sweden and UK (amongst others) visited David Ravelo in prison. 
The last visit was in 2014.
Members of the German, Irish and French parliaments also visited David 
Ravelo in prison. In 2010 a group of British parliamentarians claimed 
for his release.
An application has been filed at the Inter-American Human Rights 
Commission (IACHR) and is currently in the information-gathering phase.



What more could the EU do?

In the last five years, some MEPs have repeatedly expressed their
concerns through public statements and written questions regarding the
situation of human rights defenders in Colombia and they have asked the
Commission to take action against the increasing number of attacks,
threats, stigmatization and baseless prosecutions. A written question on
David Ravelo’s case was submitted in 2012. In 2015, a MEP visited David
in prison. This mobilisation must continue to avoid that the case of
David Ravelo disappears from the attention of the international
community. 



You can act by:
Making public pronouncements against the violation of national and 
international standards on the right to due process in the case of David
 Ravelo and highlighting the need for an in-depth reform of the legal 
system as a guarantee of non-repetition.Urging the Colombian authorities to investigate and prosecute those 
responsible for all the irregularities in the process against David 
Ravelo. Observing the upcoming trial hearings against “El Panadero” (“the 
Baker”), the paramilitary accused of false testimony, since these could 
impact Ravelo’s case in the long-term. Because of the involvement of 
paramilitaries, the case should be reviewed under the Special Peace 
Jurisdiction that will be created as part of the Peace Agreements.Visiting David Ravelo in Barrancabermeja’s prison, where he was transferred in August 2015. 

Social Media Action

Tweet your support to David Ravelo and join our call for justice by taking a picture holding our banner which is available here.

Use the hashtag #Justice4Ravelo  and the hashtag of the campaign #Stand4HRDS.

The description of the case of David Ravelo can be found here.Website: www.stand4humanrightsdefenders.eu#Stand4HRDS 