Belarus:  Condemnation of trade union leaders, additional blows to freedom of association - Publication of an international trial observation report: Case Belarus v. Henadz Fiadynich and Ihar Komlik
August 30, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Reports and Publications / Belarus / 2018 / AugustBelarus: Condemnation of trade union leaders, additional blows to freedom of association - Publication of an international trial observation report: Case Belarus v. Henadz Fiadynich and Ihar KomlikBelarus_Trial observation note_3008187 pages / 2.21 MB
Publication of an international
trial observation report
 
Paris-Geneva,
August 30, 2018 – “Conviction of leaders of independent trade union REP
Henadz Fiadynich and Ihar Komlik on tax evasion charges is politically
motivated  and trial proceedings were
marred by procedural irregularities”, concludes the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (an FIDH-OMCT partnership) in a report
published today. “The convictions should be overturned on appeal”.
 
The two independent trade
union leaders, Messieurs Henadz Fiadynich and Ihar Komlik,
respectively Chairman and Chief Accountant of Radio and Electronic Industry
Workers (REP), were found guilty of tax evasion for having received up to
140,000 EUR into a foreign bank account in neighboring Lithuania, withdrawn the
funds and transported the cash back to Belarus, with the help of colleagues,
and for having failed to declare the receipt of such funds as income resulting
in the failure to pay around 22,867 thousand Belarusian Rubles (approximately
9,790 EUR). The judgment was delivered on August 24, 2018. Defendants were
sentenced to four years of restriction of liberty without imprisonment, five
years of restriction on holding a senior management position, and a fine of
47,560 Belarusian Rubles (approximately 19,950 EUR). 
 
Lawyer Ilya Nuzov, Head of the
Eastern Europe-Central Asia Desk at FIDH, was mandated by the Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders to conduct a trial observation mission
in the Saviecki District Court. The task of the trial observer was to assess
the fairness of the trial, in light of international law standards binding
Belarus. Trial observation revealed major flaws
in the conduct of pre-trial investigation and proceedings. During the trial,
several witnesses complained that their pre-trial statements were procured
through threats, intimidation and other pressure exerted by State agents during
initial questioning. Moreover, the prosecution’s case was built on unreliable
pieces of evidence. All thse facts weigh heavily against the lawfulness and
reliability of such evidence, as well as the ability of Messrs. Komlik and
Fiyadynich to prepare an adequate defence. 
 
Furthermore,
the trial failed to take place in a conducive environment. The pronouncement of
the verdict on August 24 was accompanied by the repression of activists who
expressed support for the two trade union leaders. 11 activists were detained
by the Belarus authorities for holding a public action in support of the
leaders of REP outside of the court house. Among them were Mr. Ales
Abramovich, Ms. Maya Naumova, politician Mr. Nikolai Statkevich
and Ms. Tamara Zaitzeva. 10 activists spent the weekend in detention,
while the majority was tried three days later for violation of Article 23.34 of
the Administrative Code regulating the procedure for the organisation or
holding of a public meeting or manifestation.
 
The report is available here.
 
The Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is
to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu , the European Union
Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society. 