Lebanon:  Promptly investigate torture and arbitrary detention allegations in the case of Mr. Tarek Rabaa.
November  9, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Lebanon / 2011 / NovemberLebanon: Promptly investigate torture and arbitrary detention allegations in the case of Mr. Tarek Rabaa.Beirut, Geneva, Paris, Lyon - November 8, 2011
Lebanon: Promptly investigate torture and
arbitrary detention  allegations in the
case of Mr. Tarek Rabaa.
The undersigned organizations demand an
immediate, independent and thorough investigation into the alleged torture and
arbitrary detention of Mr. Tarek Rabaa in Lebanon. Furthermore the undersigned
organizations call on the Lebanese authorities for his immediate release, if
his confession proves to have been forcibly extracted under torture.
Tarek Rabaa, a 41-years old Lebanese citizen, working as engineer
at Alfa Telecom Company, was summoned to the Ministry of Defense for
investigation on 12 July 2010. There, he was asked about a French phone number he
received a call from, on his Lebanese mobile, while he was attending a training
session in France in 2007. The Lebanese army intelligence suspected that this
number belonged to a Mossad agent. It was later established by his lawyer that
this number is in fact related to a transportation company that was dealing in
France with the group of Lebanese trainees from the Alfa Telecom Company. Mr.
Rabaa answered the questions posed to him by the Lebanese army intelligence.
Right after that, Mr. Rabaa was reportedly
handcuffed and forcibly undressed. During his detention at the Ministry of
Defense detention center he was allegedly tortured with electric shocks, additionally
he was left standing during 20 days and slapped very severely on his ears. He was
allowed to see his sister - acting as his lawyer- at first only 32 days after
his arrest. According to available information, he was subjected to torture and
ill-treatment for 108 days at the Ministry of Defense detention center - before
being transferred to Roumieh prison, where he is still detained.
During the investigation, Mr. Rabaa refused to
sign most of the documents presented to him by the Lebanese army intelligence,
but his full name (not his signature) was handwritten at the bottom of the
pages and then presented to the military justice as his “confession”. On the
basis of the above mentioned documents the military justice issued an arrest
warrant on 28 July 2010, 16 days after the arrest. He was charged with
collaboration with Israel under articles 274, 275 and 278 of the Lebanese
criminal code.
His trial in front of the military court began
on 7 February 2011 (at this session Mr. Rabaa lost consciousness and had to be
taken to hospital). 
His defense presented all the proofs of his
innocence to the military justice and on 27 June 2011 a forensic doctor provided
the military justice with a medical certificate that proves he was subjected to
torture, but the military justice refused to consider it. The next session is
scheduled on 12 December 2011. 
If proven, the above mentioned allegations
represent serious violations of the Lebanese criminal procedure code[1] and of
Lebanon’s international commitments[2]. In this
case the undersigned organizations would consider that Mr. Rabaa is a victim of
torture and arbitrary detention and should be immediately released, and the
perpetrators should be held accountable and brought to justice. Victims of
torture must be ensured the right to an effective remedy for the psychological
and physical pain inflicted to them, as well as the right to reparation with compensation and
rehabilitation. 
The undersigned organization would also like to
reiterate that the Military Court constitute a serious breach to fair trials as
laid in International Standards and to the integrity of the judicial system.
Thus, they should have no jurisdiction over civilians. 
Signatories:
-        
Lebanese
Center for Human Rights (CLDH)
-        
Al
Karama for Human Rights 
-        
World
Organization Against Torture (OMCT)
-        
ALEF
- Act for human rights
-        
International
Federation of Human Rights (FIDH)
-        
Working
Together for Human Rights (AEDH)
-        
Action
by Christians Against Torture (ACAT – France)



[1]                      The Lebanese criminal
procedure code notably provides a maximum delay of 48 hours for custody
detention, the right for the suspect to remain silent and the cancellation of
any confession extracted under torture. 


[2]                       Lebanon is a state party
to the International covenant on civil and political rights that notably
provides the rules for a fair trial and to the Convention against torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatments that strictly prohibits torture. 