China:  China: arrest and detention of Internet activist Zhang Yuxiang
March 18, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / China / 2003 / MarchChina: China: arrest and detention of Internet activist Zhang YuxiangCase CHN 090103.3 Arbitrary and incommunicado detention / Freedom of expression  Geneva, March 18th, 2003  The International Secretariat of the OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the People’s Republic of China.  Description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by Human Rights in China about the arrest and detention of Internet activist Zhang Yuxiang in Nanjing, China.  According to the information received, Zhang Yuxiang was arrested at his home on March 12th, 2003, at around ten o’clock at night.  He was reportedly taken from his home on Zhujiang Road, Nanjing, and transported to the Jiangsu Provincial Public Security Bureau.  From there, it is reported that Zhang was placed under house arrest in a guesthouse in Jiangsu’s Siyang County. According to the information received, Zhang’s wife has not received any formal notice or documentation regarding her husband’s arrest.    It is suspected that Zhang was arrested so that he could be interrogated about various articles that he had posted on the Internet. Zhang had previously been arrested and imprisoned for two years on charges of counter-revolutionary activities, after he helped to form the Chinese Democratic Federation. Following his release from prison, Zhang reportedly began to take part in petitions with other political dissidents and to post his political views on the Internet.    Zhang’s arrest follows the recent arrests of other Internet activists. According to the information received, the Chinese authorities are cracking down on free expression on the Internet, with many other political dissidents have reportedly been arrested on similar charges, including, Liu Di and Li Yibin in Beijing, Ouyang Yi in Sichuan, Jiang Lijun in Liaoning and Tao Haidong in Xinjiang. Tao Haindong has reportedly been sentenced to seven years in prison.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the personal integrity of Zhang Yuxiang and the other afore-mentioned dissidents, notably due to the fact that Zhang is being detained incommunicado and therefore is at a heightened risk of being subjected to ill-treatment or torture. OMCT calls on the Chinese authorities to guarantee Zhang’s physical and psychological integrity and immediately release him in the absence of valid legal charges. OMCT also calls on the Chinese authorities to guarantee the internationally recognized right to the freedom of opinion and expression.    Brief reminder of the situation  According to the information received, the Government of China is cracking down on dissident activity during the meetings of the National People’s Congress and the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference, which are both being held in Beijing. It is reported that the head of China’s Ministry of State Security, Zhao Yongkang, is playing a large role in ensuring that the meetings are not disrupted by dissident activity. Many other activists have reportedly been detained incommunicado because of their political activities on the Internet.   Action requested  Please write to the authorities in the People's Republic of China, urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Zhang Yuxiang, and the other aforementioned persons that are being detained in relation with political activism on the Internet; ii.	order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these arrests in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iv.	put an immediate end to the persecution and harassment of political dissidents; v.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country, notably the freedom of expression, in accordance with international human rights laws and standards.  Addresses  ·	President Jiang Zemin, People's Republic of China; C/o Embassy of the People's Republic of China; 2300 Connecticut Ave., NW, Washington, D.C., 20008: Fax: + 01 202 588-0032 ·	President Jiang Zemin, People's Republic of China; c/o Permanent Mission of the People's Republic of China, Chemin de Surville 11, Case postale 85, 1213 Petit-Lancy 2, Geneva, Switzerland, fax: +4122 7937014, e-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int ·	President Jiang Zemin, Chinese Communist Party, Yongdingmen CK Street, Beijing 100032, PRC  Please also write to the embassies of in the People's Republic of China in your respective country.  Geneva, March 18th, 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 