Morocco:  Significant progress on the legislative level, major efforts are still needed for the implementation of the principles enshrined therein
December 14, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / Morocco / 2012 / DecemberMorocco: Significant progress on the legislative level, major efforts are still needed for the implementation of the principles enshrined therein

Rabat, 14 December 2012 
At the conclusion of a six-day visit to Rabat by a delegation of anti-torture experts, the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) calls on the governmental authorities to ensure that the
reform process leads to an end to torture and to full accountability. The delegation calls on the
authorities to work with civil society to ensure that advances in the constitution, legislation,
human rights mechanisms, plans of action and strategic plans, are coupled with adequate
measures to ensure the success of such reforms. It is clear to the delegation that the biggest
challenge facing the improvement of human rights in Morocco is the difference between the rate
of reform and the rate of implementation of the reforms. In this accountability for torture must
become a priority.

The OMCT delegation wishes to express its appreciation for the openness of the discussions with
different authorities on the reforms required to end any practices of torture and ill treatment. The
delegation met with the head of the Inter-ministerial Delegation for Human Rights (DIDH), the
head of the Delegation for the Administration of Prisons, and representatives of the National
Council on Human Rights (CNDH), the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Interior.

The OMCT recognizes improvements of human rights protection made in the 2011 constitution,
the creation of the DIDH, the recent steps taken to ratify three optional protocols, including the
Optional Protocol to the UN Convention Against Torture (OPCAT), and looks forward to these
processes reaching completion. The delegation is encouraged to see that the debate on the
creation of a national prevention mechanism is ongoing, as well as discussions on ratifying the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. The ratification of the Rome Statute would
represent a definitive commitment to combating impunity.

The OMCT supports discussions on moving towards the abolition of the death penalty, and
strongly encourages the State to take the next natural step, after having a moratorium in place
since 1993, and the project to reduce the number of crimes allowing for the death penalty from 41
to nine. The abolition of the death penalty would represent a monumental step not only for
Morocco, but also for the entire region, and would be emblematic of the State’s desire to set a
new and historic human rights record. In this regard, the OMCT strongly encourages the
government to vote for abolition in the 20 December vote before the General Assembly, as this
represents a logical step given the moratorium in place since twenty years.

The decades of focused work on the part of Moroccan NGOs has proven essential to changing
Morocco’s human rights record and will be a fundamental condition for further progress. The
delegation encourages the Moroccan State to intensify its efforts to partner with civil society not
only in developing plans of action to address human rights violations, but also implicating them
in the implementation process and allowing it to monitor its progress.

Unfortunately despite the guarantees enshrined in the Constitution and the new mechanisms
created to monitor and ensure human rights, the delegation met with several communities that are
critical of State, and these communities presented serious allegations that practices of torture and
ill-treatment by the police and other law enforcement bodies continue and that impunity for such
violations so far remains the rule. The information received confirms serious concerns expressed
earlier this year by the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture.



The OMCT invites the authorities to take all steps to address such allegations, give victims and
their families detailed responses based on effective and independent investigations, and grant
adequate reparations where violations are found.

It is thus vital to ensure that the reform process does not remain a written exercise, but that such
reforms reach those individuals in a position to violate human rights, and protect the most
vulnerable populations. Particular attention must be paid to the vigilant monitoring of conditions
in prisons, police stations, and other centers of detention, as well as measures to ensure the
independence of the judiciary, and the proper training of all state officials exercising positions of
authority, including the General Office of National Security (DSGN). It is equally vital to ensure
a clear separation between law enforcement and intelligence and ensure effective legal and
parliamentary oversight over the DSGN. 
Background of the OMCT mission:

The delegation was led by Dick Marty, OMCT’s Vice-president, former state prosecutor of the
Canton of Ticino, member of the Swiss Council of States and former President of the Legal and
Human Rights Committee of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe. It also
included the OMCT’s Human Rights Officer for the Middle East and North Africa region, Belkis
Wille, and was undertaken in cooperation with members of the SOS Torture Network, the
Moroccan Organisation for Human Rights (OMDH) and the Association for Human Rights in
Morocco (AMDH).

This mission was carried out in the context of the submission of the fourth periodic report of
Morocco, which was reviewed by the Committee Against Torture on 1-2 November 2011 in
Geneva. The OMCT carried out a mission to Morocco in July 2011. During this visit the OMCT
delegation carried out research in order to draft to an alternative report for the Committee. This
report was written in collaboration with the Moroccan Committee Against Torture, and with the
Moroccan Organisation for Human Rights (OMDH). The report was submitted to the Committee
in November 2011, in order to provide the Committee with NGO perspectives to the
government’s implementation of the Convention Against Torture (Convention).

This follow-up mission forms part of global efforts led by the OMCT to foster the
implementation of the recommendations of the UN Committee Against Torture undertaken with
the financial support of the European Union and the Oak Foundation. 
For further information:

Belkis Wille in Tunis - bw@omct.org, Tel: +216 22 194 051

Morocco and Its Observance of the Convention Against Torture: Alternative Report to the United Nations Committee Against Torture
Concluding Observations of the Committee Against Torture, 21 December 2011 