India:  Renewed threats and harassment against relatives of Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar
April 27, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / India / 2016 / AprilIndia: Renewed threats and harassment against relatives of Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar
New information
IND 004 / 1114 / OBS 091.5
Death threats / 
Harassment / Impunity 
India
April 27, 2016
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), has received new information
and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in India.

 
New information: 
 
The Observatory has been informed by Banglar Manabadhikar Suraksha
Mancha (MASUM) of renewed threats and harassment against relatives of Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar, a District Human Rights Monitor for MASUM in Murshidabad district
(West Bengal, India). Mr. Sarkar is a renowned human rights defender who has
been instrumental in denouncing numerous cases of human rights violations in
Murshidabad district.   

According to the information received, on March 28, 2016, at around 7
pm, the house of Mr. Abdul Majid Seikh, Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar’s brother, in the
village of Bardhanpur Choyapara, Raninagar, Murshidabad, was again surrounded by
Mr. Rafikul Islam and seven other accomplices[1],
who were all already involved in previous assaults against Mr. Abdul Majid
Seikh’s house on March 23 and 24, 2016 (see background information). The assailants
gathered in front of the house, heavily armed with firearms and sharp weapons,
shouting and uttering threats against Ms. Janera Bibi, Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar’s
aunt, who lives in the house neighbouring the one of Mr. Abdul Majid Seikh. The
attackers threatened to set fire to the house and burn alive the members of the
family if they did not withdraw the Raninagar police station case no 123/2016[2],
which was brought against Mr. Rafikul Islam and his accomplices following the March
23, 2016 attack, based on a complaint submitted by Ms. Janera Bibi.
 
On March 30, 2016, Mr. Abdul Majid Seikh’s family filed a new complaint before
the local Police Superintendent of Murshidabad
district.
 
On April 2, 2016, at about 7 pm, Mr. Rafikul Islam, Mr. Mejarul Sheikh
and other accomplices assembled once more in front of the houses of Mr. Abdul
Majid Sheikh and Ms. Janera Bibi, heavily armed. They again threatened Mr.
Ajimuddin Sarkar’s relatives with dire consequences if they did not withdraw
the above-mentioned Raninagar police station case. The situation was brought
again to the Raninagar police station, which was reluctant to report the case.
Therefore they filed another written complaint signed by Ms. Janera Bibi dated
April 3, 2016 before the local Police Superintendent of Murshidabad district.
 
Yet, as of issuing this Urgent Appeal, the Raninagar police had still
not arrested any of the accused persons, and Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar’s family
remains concerned for their safety. Moreover, on April 23, 2016, at 10.51 am, Police
Sub-Inspector Mr. Gautam Dutta, from Raninagar police station, called Mr.
Sayeed Hossain, Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar’s elder brother, on his mobile phone,
asking him “to compromise the matter mutually” with the accused persons.
 
The Observatory expresses its deep concern following the renewed threats
and acts of harassment against Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar’s relatives, and recalls
that these are not isolated incidents. Such recurrent acts of intimidation and harassment,
including by the police[3], seem to be
retaliation for his work as MASUM District Human Rights Monitor in Murshidabad.
In particular, it is noteworthy that one of the assailants, Mr. Amzad Hossian,
is the son of Mr. Nasiruddin Sarkar, who is the Pradhan of Malibari I Gram
Panchayet, against whom MASUM has made complaints for misappropriation of
public money.
 
Background information:
 
On November 21, 2014, law enforcement agents from the
Raninagar police station arrested Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar at his place of
residence and transferred him to the ACJM Court, Lalbagh. Mr. Sarkar was
reportedly arrested pursuant to an arrest warrant for a pending criminal case
under the Passport Act.
 
On May 20, 2014, Mr. Sarkar had filed an application
before the ACJM Court, Lalbagh, expressing his concern that he had been falsely
implicated in an unknown criminal case by the police and the BSF, and
requesting more details about such case. However, until his arrest six months
later, Mr. Sarkar did not receive any information about the status of said
criminal case, neither did he receive any summons from the police nor the
court.
 
Mr. Sarkar was reportedly assaulted, abused and
mistreated by the police during his arrest as well as in custody. On November
22, 2014, Mr. Sarkar was admitted to Lalbagh Sub-Divisional Hospital and
subsequently referred to Berhampore New General Hospital on November 27, 2014, for medical
treatment following the injuries suffered in custody. On November 28, 2014, he
was taken to Kolkata for advanced medical treatment. On November 29, 2014, he
underwent psychiatric counselling; the medical report stated that he had
several injuries such as a suspected fractured rib, as well as post-traumatic
stress, a tear on a ligament on his left leg,
a feeling of humiliation, intense anxiety, fear and a feeling of sadness and
helplessness. He suffered from insomnia and his doctors expressed their concern
that the attack could have long-term effects on his psychological health. Mr.
Sarkar went to Calcutta Medical College and Hospital for further treatment on
December 3, 2014.
 
On November 23, 2014, Mr. Sarkar’s son filed a complaint to the
local Police Superintendent of Murshidabad urging the police to carry out an
investigation into the beatings his father had been subjected to while in
police custody. However, to this date, no information could be obtained
regarding any enquiry or investigation following the complaint.
 
On September 22, 2015, Mr. Sarkar was abducted in Sekhpara (Murshidabad,
West Bengal) by five to seven police officers from the Islampur police station
who were not wearing uniforms. At the time of the incident, Mr. Sarkar was
talking with victims of torture and their family members when the police
officers arrived in a car and started beating and insulting him. The officers
then placed him inside the vehicle and took him away. 
 
On September 23, 2015, Mr. Sarkar was taken before the Additional
District and Sessions Judge (2nd Court)[4] in Berhampore-Murshidabad
and a criminal case was opened against him under Sections 376, 511, 323, 506
and 400 of the Indian Criminal Code and under Sections 8 and 12 of the Act for
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act. During his detention he was
slapped, kicked and pounded on the chest as well as verbally abused. He was not
given access to his medication and was denied food at night. He was then
obliged to walk barefoot and was brought before the Court in this condition. At
6.15 p.m. on the same day, a petition for bail was rejected and Mr. Sarkar was
then transferred to the prison Berhampore Central Correctional Home. A Criminal
Revision at Calcutta High Court (CRR No. 404/2016) was filed to quash the
criminal proceeding against Mr. Sarkar at Islampur police station.
 
Two other cases against Mr. Sarkar, namely the
“Raninagar police station case No. 364/2013” (under section 12 of Passport Act
read with section 109 of Indian Penal Code) and the “Domkal police station case
No. 1243/2014” (under section 308 of the Indian Penal Code), are also ongoing[5].
A Criminal Revision at Calcutta High Court (CRR No. 2671/2015) was filed to
quash the criminal case pending against Mr. Sarkar at Raninagar police station.
 
MASUM has filed several complaints regarding
the harassment of its members and has been regularly sharing information with
the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC). Regarding previous incidents with
Mr. Sarkar and other MASUM members, the Focal Point on Human Rights Defenders
at the NHRC called MASUM and informed them that they had taken up the case and
sought a report from the relevant police and civil administration, but up to
this date no documents have been shared with MASUM and no appropriate action
has reportedly been taken. 
 
On September 22, 2015, immediately following
Mr. Sarkar's abduction, MASUM filed a brief complaint with a request for urgent
measures from the NHRC and contacted the Focal Point of the NHRC on Human
Rights Defenders. However, as of issuing this Urgent Appeal, no actions had reportedly been taken over the
allegations of police abuse upon Mr. Sarkar.
 
On November 27, 2015, Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar was granted bail[6]
in relation to the first criminal case, but was not released on that day as the
other case was still pending against him. 
 
On December 8, 2015, Mr. Sarkar was finally released on bail pursuant to
the second case, since the de facto complainant filed an affidavit
stating that she did not bring any allegation of rape against Mr. Sarkar and
she had no knowledge of the related criminal case against him.
 
On March 23,
2016, at midnight, Mr. Rafikul Islam and his accomplices used sharp weapons and
firearms to attack the house of Mr. Abdul Majid Seikh. The attack occurred
while everyone in the house was asleep. During the attack, the perpetrators
shouted threats against Mr. Ripon Seikh, Mr. Masudul Hossain and Mr. Sahidul
Islam, Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar’s nephews. The group also loudly insulted the women
inside the house. Although the Raninagar police station was phoned and informed
of the attack that night, they did not intervene.
 
The next morning at 6 am, as Mr. Ripon Seikh, Mr. Abdul Majid Seikh’s
son, exited his house, Mr. Rafikul Islam and his group attacked him with
daggers, pistols and bombs. Mr. Ripon Seikh was hit in the back with a dagger
and fell down bleeding. At that moment, Mr. Kabil Seikh and Mr. Habil Seikh,
two cousins of Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar, tried to help Mr. Ripon Seikh and were
both attacked and severely injured. The attackers then fled and eyewitnesses of
the incident brought the injured to Godhanpara Block Primary Centre, who were
transferred to the Baharampur New General Hospital due to their serious
condition. Messrs. Ripon Seikh, Kabil Seikh and Habil Seikh were subsequently released
from the hospital but remain under medical treatment.

On March 24, 2016, Mr. Ripon Seikh’s grandmother registered a complaint with
the Raninagar police station, but a copy of the First Information Report (FIR)
was only provided to the family on March 25, 2016 evening after several
requests were made. Raninagar police registered case no. 123/2016 based on
this complaint against Mr. Piarul Islam, Mr. Nijarul Islam, Mr. Rafikul Islam,
Mr. Panjatan Sk, Ms. Hema Bibi, Ms. Adora Bibi and Mr. Hamida Bibi.
 
Moreover, on March 24, 2016, the Raninagar police registered another
criminal case[7] based on a complaint
lodged by Ms. Hema Bibi (Mr. Rafikul Islam’s wife and one of the accused
persons in above-mentioned attack) against Messrs. Abdul Majid Seikh, Ripon
Seikh, Sahidul Islam, Masidul Seikh, Alamgir Kabir, Babu Seikh and Makil Islam,
who are all close relatives of Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar. On March 30, 2016,
they all surrendered in court of the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Lalbagh, and were released on bail.
 
It is feared that other fabricated criminal cases may be started by the
police against Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar and/or his family members in the future. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in India, urging them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological
integrity of Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar, his
relatives as well as of all members of MASUM and all human rights
defenders in India;
 
ii. Carry out
an immediate, thorough, impartial and transparent investigation into
the above-mentioned attacks, threats and acts of harassment against Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar and his relatives, in
order to identify all those responsible, bring them before an independent
tribunal, and sanction them as provided by the law;
 
iii. Put an end to all acts of harassment - including at the judicial
level - against Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar,
his relatives and all members of MASUM as well as against all human
rights defenders in India so that they are able to carry out their work without
hindrances;
 
iv. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9,
1998, especially its Articles 1 and 12.2;
 
v. More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments
ratified by India.
 
Please also write to the National Human Rights
Commission of India, urging it:
 
i. to undertake an independent and impartial
investigation into the above-mentioned attacks, threats and acts of harassment against Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar and his relatives, in
order to identify all those responsible, bring them before an independent
tribunal, and sanction them as provided by the law;
 
ii. to call upon the Indian authorities:
- to guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological
integrity of Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar, his
relatives as well as of all members of MASUM and all human rights
defenders in India;
- to put an end to all acts of harassment - including at the judicial
level - against them as well as
against all human rights defenders in India.
 
Addresses:

Mr. Nanredra Damodardas Modi, Prime
Minister of India. Fax: + 91 11 2301 6857. E-mail: pmosb@pmo.nic.in / manmo@sansad.inMr. Raj Nath Singh, Union Minister
of Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs of India. Fax: +91 11 2309
2979Mr. Justice T.S. Thakur, Chief Justice of India. Fax: +91 11 233 83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.inMr. Justice H.L. Dattu, Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission of India. Fax +91 11 2465 1329. Email: covdnhrc@nic.in; ionhrc@nic.inMr. A. K. Parashar, Focal Point on Human Rights Defenders, National
Human Rights Commission, India. Email: hrd-nhrc@nic.inMr. Keshari Nath Tripathi, Governor of West Bengal, Kolkata, Fax +91 33 2200 2444. Email : secy-gov-wb@nic.in; governor-wb@nic.inMiss Mamata Banerjee, Chief Minister of West Bengal. Fax: +91
33 2214-352833 2214-3528. E-mail: cm@wb.gov.in H.E. Mr. Ajit Kumar, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of India to the United Nations in
Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 906 86 96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.intEmbassy of India in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 6489638 / +32 2
6451869

Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of India in your
respective country.



[1] Mr. Rafikul Islam’s accomplices include his brothers
Mr. Mejarul Seikh and Mr. Panjaton Seikh; his wife, Ms. Hema Bibi; Mr. Piarul
Islam; Mr. Nasiruddin Seikh; Mr. Santu Seikh; and Mr. Amzad Hossian, who is the
son of Mr. Nasiruddin Sarkar, the Pradhan of Malibari I Gram Panchayet (local
self government). All are believed to also be engaged in different illegal
activities such as extortion, theft, violence against women, and smuggling.
Despite official complaints lodged by local residents regarding these illegal
activities, the local police have undertaken no action against these individuals
for these crimes. Mr. Rafikul Islam is a local leader of the Indian National
Congress Party and his wife, Ms. Hema Bibi, is a member of Malibari l Gram
Panchayet as a candidate of the Indian National Congress Party.


[2] The Raninagar police station case no. 123/2016 was registered
under sections 323 (hurt) / 341 (wrongful restraint) / 326 (causing grievous
hurt by dangerous weapons) / 506 (criminal intimidation) and 34 (common
intention) of the Indian Penal Code.


[3] See Observatory Urgent Appeal ​IND 001 / 0514 / OBS 041, issued on May 15, 2014.


[4] This Court is a
designated Special Court for the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act (NDPS Act) and the Protection of Children from Sexual
Offences Act (POCSO Act).


[5] For more information
on the cases, see Observatory Urgent Appeal IND 004 / 1114 / OBS 091.3, issued on January 8, 2016.


[6] No charge sheet was
filed against him in relation to that case.


[7] The case is registered as “Raninagar police station
case no. 125/2016” under sections 448 (criminal trespass) / 323 (hurt) / 325
(causing hurt by dangerous weapons) / 427 (causing mischief) / 34 (common
intention) of the Indian Penal Code.


CallSend SMSCall from mobileAdd to SkypeYou'll need Skype CreditFree via Skype 