Moldova, Republic of:  Follow-up of case MDA 210411_Mr. Ilie Cazac released from detention
November  1, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Moldova, Republic of / 2011 / NovemberMoldova, Republic of: Follow-up of case MDA 210411_Mr. Ilie Cazac released from detentionMDA 210411.2Follow-up of the case MDA 210411 and MDA
210411.1 
Release
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) has received new information on the following situation in
the Republic of Moldova/ Region of Transnistria.
New information
The
International Secretariat of OMCT has
been informed by a reliable source and Antenna International, a member
organisation of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the release, on 31 October 2011, of Mr. Ilie Cazac,after being pardoned by the president of the unrecognized
Transnistrian authorities (Pridnestrovian
Moldavian Republic[1] or PMR, also
known as "Pridnestrovie"). 
Mr. Ilie
Cazac, a 25-year-old
resident of Tighina (Bender), was arrested by members of the Ministry of State
Security (MGB) of the unrecognized Transnistrian authorities, on
20 March 2010, allegedly tortured and ill-treated
in custody, and later sentenced to 14 years in prison
“for grand treason and espionage in favour of the Republic of Moldova”.
He was detained in Tiraspol Penitentiary no.2, without access to an
independent doctor. 
Background information
OMCT
had earlier been informed about
the arrest and detention of Mr. Ilie Cazac, an appointed
inspector at the city’s
tax inspectorate, on 20 March 2010, on alleged charges of “state betrayal” and “espionage in favor of
the Republic of Moldova” (according to the version of the Transnistrian authorities). The
details of the accusations remained unclear. After Mr. Ilie Cazac’s arrest, his home was also reportedly searched by
members of the MGB. 
According
to the information received, Mr.
Ilie Cazac was arrested at home, in the city of
Tighina, and first held incommunicado. His family was not informed about
his arrest and fate for two weeks. Mr. Cazac allegedly suffered torture and
ill-treatment, including beatings and conditions of detention amounting to
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, with a view of extracting a “confession”
(see Urgent appeal MDA 240111).
According to the same information, Mr. Ilie Cazac was assisted in court
by a lawyer appointed by the de facto Transnistrian authorities after being refused a lawyer from outside
the region. This lawyer allegedly never informed on the details of the case. On
9
February 2011, following a trial held
behind closed doors, Mr. Ilie Cazac was sentenced by the Supreme Court of the
Transnistrian region to 14 years in prison. Mr. Ilie Cazac was subsequently transferred to the Tiraspol Penitentiary no.2,
where he was detained in poor health. 
On
22 April 2011, although Mr. Ilie Cazac was allowed to receive from his mother
some food and medicines as well as to have a daily phone call with his family,
he was also forced to provide a written explanation to the prison
administration on how his case became known at the international level.
Furthermore, two criminal detainees, who had been previously detained along
with Mr. Ilie Cazac in Penitentiary no. 1/ Glinaia in summer 2010, and who had
allegedly beaten and threatened him with death and rape, were reportedly transferred
to Tiraspol Penitentiary no.2
without any particular reason. 
On the same day, on 22 April 2011, Mr. Ilie Cazac’s
mother was also informed that he would be allowed to “invite” a doctor to examine him, albeit
only a doctor practising in the Transnistrian region. Mr. Ilie Cazac
was later examined, on 26 and 27 April 2011, by a stomatologist
from the prison’s medical unit with regard to his toothaches. The doctor
reportedly suggested him to extract six to seven teeth as the prison’s medical
unit is not equipped to treat dental caries, which he refused. On 16 May 2011, after complaining about chest pain, Mr. Ilie Cazac
was again examined by a doctor from the medical unit and had an
electrocardiogram (ECG). However, he was reportedly not properly informed by
the doctor about the diagnosis and the medicines his mother would need to buy
for him. Mr. Ilie Cazac also suffered from digestive and gastric problems. 
OMCT was informed that Mr.
Ilie Cazac’s family was
repeatedly harassed, intimidated and threatened since his arrest by
representatives of the de facto Transnistrian authorities, with the result that
his family was forced to leave its home in Tighina.
Remarks
OMCT wishes to thank all of the individuals and organisations that have
taking action as a response to the urgent appeals. No further action is
currently required on your part concerning this case. 
***
Geneva, 1st November 2011



[1] The Transnistrian
region broke away from Moldova, declaring
independence unilaterally in 1990. The self proclaimed Pridnestrovian
Moldavian Republic (PMR) is not recognized by the
international community. Tighina (Bender) is a town controlled by the
authorities of the Republic of Moldova and of the
self-proclaimed Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic. Since the Moldovan-Russian Agreement on 21 July 1992, Tighina (Bender) is under a
strong Russian peacekeeping presence. 