Cambodia:  In landmark decision, UN body declares the detention of five human rights defenders arbitrary #FreeThe5KH
December 18, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2016 / DecemberCambodia: In landmark decision, UN body declares the detention of five human rights defenders arbitrary #FreeThe5KH
Geneva-Paris-Phnom Penh, December 18, 2016. Our
organisations welcome the recent Opinion adopted by the United Nations Working
Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD) that recognise the arbitrary nature of the
detention of human rights defenders Ny Chakrya,
Ny Sokha, Yi Soksan, Nay Vanda, and Lim Mony. Our organisations call upon the Cambodian authorities to
implement the Opinion of the WGAD by releasing the five human rights defenders
immediately and providing them appropriate compensation. 

On
November 21, 2016, the WGAD ruled that the ongoing detention of Mr. Ny Chakrya, Deputy
Secretary-General of the National Election Committee (NEC), and four staff
members of the Cambodian
Human Rights and Development Association (ADHOC), Messrs. Ny
Sokha, Yi Soksan, Nay Vanda, and Ms. Lim Mony, was
“arbitrary.”
 
Following a
submission made by the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
(OMCT-FIDH partnership), the Cambodian Center for Human Rights (CCHR) and the Cambodian League for the
Promotion and Defense of Human Rights (LICADHO) in June 2016, the WGAD’s Opinion No. 45/2016 ruled that the five human rights
defenders (HRDs) “have been discriminated
against based on their status as human rights defenders, and in violation of
their right to equality before the law and equal protection of the law under
article 26 of the ICCPR.” This is the first time ever that the WGAD - or
any other UN mechanism receiving individual complaints - has referred to HRDs
as a protected group that is entitled to equal legal protection under Article
26 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). The
ruling also recognised the violation of the five HRDs’ “rights to offer and
provide professionally qualified legal assistance and other relevant advice and
assistance in defending human rights.”

 
In addition, the WGAD found that the targeting of
ADHOC staff members for having provided “legitimate
legal advice and other assistance” violated the five HRDs’ right to freedom
of association. It ruled that violations of fair
trial rights (including the fact that the five were denied legal counsel from
the beginning of their questioning), unjustified pre-trial detention, and
statements made by the Cambodian authorities which denied the five the
presumption of innocence - all of which contravene Cambodia’s international
human rights obligations in respect to the right to a fair trial - are also
serious enough to consider their ongoing detention as arbitrary.
 
The
WGAD concluded that “the deprivation of
liberty of Ny Sokha, Nay
Vanda, Yi Soksan, Lim Mony and Ny Chakrya, being in contravention of
articles 7, 9, 10, 11 and 20 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
of articles 9, 10, 14, 22 and 26 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, is arbitrary.”
 
“We welcome this landmark Opinion adopted by the Working Group, and now
call upon the Cambodian authorities to act on the ruling and immediately
release Ny Chakrya, Ny Sokha, Yi
Soksan, Nay Vanda, and Lim Mony and drop all charges against them,” declared our organisations today.
 
The five human
rights defenders have now been in pre-trial detention on charges of bribery for 234 days since their
arrest in April 2016. Their deprivation of liberty infringes on both
international human rights law and Article 205 of Cambodia’s Criminal Procedure
Code, which sets out the conditions under which provisional detention can be ordered.
On November 30, 2016, the Supreme Court upheld a previous decision adopted by
the Court of Appeals on June 13, 2016 to refuse to release the five HRDs on
bail. On November 28, 2016, the Court of Appeals upheld the extension of the
pre-trial detention for another six months and refused to close the
investigation. All five detainees are being held alongside
convicted criminals, contrary to Article 10(2)(a) of the ICCPR, and Article 26
of Cambodia’s Law on Prisons.
 
On September 22, 2016, the Phnom Penh Municipal
Court convicted Mr. Ny Chakrya on charges of defamation, malicious
denunciation, and publication of commentaries intended to unlawfully coerce
judicial authorities and sentenced him to six months in prison. The charges
stemmed from a criminal case dating back to the time when he was Head of the
Human Rights Section at ADHOC. Mr. Ny Chakrya’s conviction was upheld by the
Court of Appeal on December 14, 2016.
 
“These cases bear all the hallmarks of politically-motivated harassment of human
rights defenders because of their legitimate human rights activities, and are illustrative of the Cambodian Government’s deliberate effort to eliminate all dissenting
voices. We urge the Cambodian authorities to stop the harassment of all human
rights defenders in the country,” concluded our organisations.
 
 
***
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme is to intervene
to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders.
OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the
European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international
civil society.
 
The
Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association
(ADHOC) is a non-governmental, independent and non-partisan human rights
organisation founded in 1991, which promotes and protects human rights in
Cambodia by means of its 24 provincial offices and its headquarters in Phnom
Penh. ADHOC’s Human Rights and Legal Aid Section, Land and Natural Resources
Section and Women and Children’s Rights Section monitor the human rights
situation on the ground, intervene in case of violations, provide assistance to
victims of rights violations - including free legal aid, and engage in
empowerment activities.

The Cambodian Center for
Human Rights (CCHR), founded in November 2002, is a non-aligned, independent,
non-governmental organisation that works to promote and protect democracy and
respect for human rights throughout Cambodia.
 
The Cambodian
League for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights (LICADHO), established in
1992, seeks to protect and promote civil, political, economic and social rights
in Cambodia through advocating for the rights of Cambodian people and
monitoring human rights abuses from its main office in Phnom Penh and 13
provincial offices.
 
For more information, please contact:

OMCT: Delphine Reculeau:
     Tel: +41 22 809 49 39; E-mail: dr[at]omct.org
FIDH: Arthur Manet / Audrey
     Couprie: Tel: + 33143552518; E-mail: press[at]fidh.org
CCHR: Chak Sopheap: Tel: +855 11 943 213; E-mail:
     chaksopheap[at]cchrcambodia.org / Pat de Brún: Tel: +855 (0) 89 536 215;
     E-mail: pat.debrun[at]cchrcambodia.org
LICADHO: Naly Pilorge, Tel: +855
     12 803 650; E-mail: advocacy[at]licadho-cambodia.org


​ 