Thailand:  Upcoming trials of human rights defenders Somyot Prueksakasemsuk and Chiranuch Premchaiporn
February 10, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2012 / FebruaryThailand: Upcoming trials of human rights defenders Somyot Prueksakasemsuk and Chiranuch PremchaipornThailand_Upcoming trials of human rights defenders Somyot Prueksakasemsuk and Chiranuch Premchaiporn186 KBH.E. Yingluck Shinawatra,
Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Thailand
Office of the Prime Minister
Government House, Thanon Phitsanulok, Dusit
Bangkok 10300, Thailand

10 February 2012

Re: Thailand - Upcoming trials of human rights defenders Somyot Prueksakasemsuk and Chiranuch Premchaiporn

Your Excellency,

We, the undersigned independent human rights organizations, write to
 you to reiterate our serious concerns about the ongoing use of the lèse
 majesté law, particularly against human rights defenders, and its 
deleterious effect on fundamental freedoms. We deeply regret the 
continued resistance by members of the Thai government, including 
high-level members of your Cabinet, political parties, and the military,
 to enter into a reasoned, broad-based debate of the necessary reforms 
of the lèse majesté law in order to improve Thailand’s observance of its
 obligations under international human rights law and constitutional 
guarantees of freedom of expression and fair trial rights, including the
 right to bail.

Next week, two high-profile lèse majesté trials will resume and 
Thailand’s failure to respect freedom of speech and fair trial standards
 will again be placed under public scrutiny.

The hearings of the trial of Ms. Chiranuch Premchaiporn,
 a known advocate for freedoms of expression and the media and Executive
 Director of the online news website Prachatai, will resume on 14 
February and conclude on 16 February. She is facing ten counts of 
charges of violations of Article 15 of the 2007 Computer Crimes Act and 
Article 112 of the Criminal Code on lèse majesté for allegedly not 
removing quickly enough anonymous third-party posts deemed offensive to 
the monarchy on a public forum on the Prachatai website. Chiranuch faces
 up to 20 years imprisonment if found guilty.

The trial of Mr. Somyot Prueksakasemsuk, long time 
labour rights activist and Editor of Voice of the Oppressed (Voice of 
Taksin), who is facing charges of lèse majesté for the publication of 
two articles that allegedly made negative references to the monarchy, 
has been detained since 30 April 2011. Somyot’s trial started in 
November 2011 and continues on 13 February in Songkhla province. He is 
facing a maximum of 30 years’ imprisonment if found guilty. Following 
the 13 February hearing, the Defence witnesses will be called to appear 
before the Bangkok Criminal Court on 18-20 April 2012, 24-26 April 2012,
 and 1-4 May 2012.

We are troubled by the fact that the three previous hearings of 
Somyot’s trial have all been held outside Bangkok, in Sa Kaeo, Petchabun
 and Nakorn Sawan provinces. Somyot reports that he had to stand up 
throughout the transfers between trials in an overcrowded truck, with 
his ankles shackled and without access to rest room facilities. Somyot 
suffers from hypertension and gout, a painful condition that affects the
 joints. While in Petchabun province, he was moved to the prison 
infirmary due to aggravation of his medical conditions.

A number of prosecution witnesses in fact work and live in Bangkok, 
although their original registered residences are in the provinces. On 
12 September 2011, the Criminal Court rejected Somyot’s lawyer’s request
 to hold hearings in Bangkok. Three other similar subsequent requests 
put forward to the Sakaeo, Petchabun and Nakorn Sawan Courts were also 
denied.

We reiterate our concern that the holding of the trials from 
province to province places undue physical and psychological burden on 
Somyot and his family. The transfers also undermine his fair trial 
rights, including the right to a speedy trial considering there are ten 
more hearings scheduled up to 4 May, by which time he will have been in 
detention for over a year. We are disturbed that Somyot’s application 
for bail has been denied for the 7th time on 6 February. The authorities
 have still not provided an adequate justification for his continued 
detention or a legally sound explanation as to why less restrictive and 
non-custodial measures are not sufficient to prevent flight and 
non-tampering with evidence. The repetition of the ill-defined concept 
of “national security” as a ground for rejecting the bail applications 
of those charged under the lèse majesté laws reinforces the perception 
that the criminalization of speech, a common practice by authoritarian 
regimes to silence criticisms, is increasingly becoming a tool of 
institutionalized oppression in Thailand, including against those 
documenting human rights violations.

In light of the numerous commitments to respect human rights and 
fundamental freedoms made by Thailand under the International Covenant 
on Civil and Political Rights and during the Universal Periodic Review 
of its human rights record in October 2011, we strongly urge the Thai 
authorities to:

   1. Immediately grant Somyot Prueksakasemsuk his constitutional 
right to bail, in accordance with fair trial standards under domestic 
and international law;

   2. Request the court to refrain from bringing new charges against
 individuals under the lèse majesté laws pending a comprehensive review 
of the said laws;

   3. Immediately drop all charges against Chiranuch Premchaiporn, 
Somyot Prueksakasemsuk and all other human rights defenders based on the
 lèse majesté laws and, more generally, guarantee in all circumstances 
that all human rights defenders in Thailand, especially those working on
 freedoms of expression and the media, are able to carry out their 
legitimate human rights activities without fear of reprisals and free of
 all restrictions, including judicial harassment, in line with the UN 
Declaration on the Rights and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and 
Organs of Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized Human 
Rights and Fundamental Freedoms;

   4. Facilitate the review of the lèse majesté laws by the Law 
Reform Commission and the National Human Rights Commission’s working 
group on the lèse majesté law with an aim to develop concrete proposals 
to bring the relevant laws into line with Thailand’s international human
 rights obligations, as recommended by the UN Special Rapporteur on the 
promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and 
expression;

   5. Encourage and foster a civil, reasoned and public debate 
regarding the need to amend the lèse majesté laws and cease to portray 
respect for the universally recognized freedom of expression and opinion
 as contradictory to the protection of the monarchy;

   6. Honor its voluntary pledge made at the UPR to issue a standing
 invitation to UN human rights experts by inviting the UN Special 
Rapporteur on freedom of opinion and expression and the UN Special 
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders to visit Thailand 
at the earliest instance.

Yours Sincerely,

Souhayr Belhassen, President
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) - in the framework of 
the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders

Gail Davidson, Executive Director
Lawyers’ Rights Watch Canada

Brittis Edman, Programme Director, Southeast Asia
Civil Rights Defenders

Gerald Staberock, Secretary General
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) - in the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders

Arjan van der Waal, Programme Director
Protection International

Yap Swee Seng, Executive Director
Asian Forum on Human Rights and Development (FORUM-ASIA)

Ineke Zeldenrust, International Coordinator
Clean Clothes Campaign (CCC)

Copied to:
H.E. Mr. Pracha Promnok, Minister of Justice of Thailand

H.E. Mr. Suraphong Towijakchaikun, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Thailand

H.E. Mr. Yongyuth Wichaidit, Minister of the Interior of Thailand

Mr. Jullasingha Wasantasingha, Attorney General, Office of the Attorney General of Thailand

Ms. Amara Pongsapich, Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission of Thailand

Mr. Kanit na Nakorn, Chairperson of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Thailand

Mr. Kanit na Nakorn, Chairperson of the Law Reform Commission of Thailand

Mr Jon Ongpakon, Chairperson of the Working Group to Amend the 
Computer Crimes Act and Lèse Majesté Law, National Human Rights 
Commission of Thailand

H.E. Mr. Pisanu Chanvitan, Ambassador Extraordinary and 
Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative of Thailand to the United 
Nations and other International Organizations in Geneva 