China:  25th Session of the Human Rights Council: Joint oral statement delivered under China's UPR
March 20, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Statements / China / 2014 / MarchChina: 25th Session of the Human Rights Council: Joint oral statement delivered under China's UPR
Please check against
delivery
HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL
25th session (3-28 March 2014)
Item 6: UPR China
Oral
statement delivered by The World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT),
a non-governmental
organisation in general consultative status in conjunction with the Tibetan
Centre for Human Rights and Democracy
Thank you Mr.
President, 
The
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and its member organisation the
Tibetan Centre for Human Rights and Democracy (TCHRD) deeply regret that China
has refused to consider ratifying OP-CAT, an important tool to prevent torture
and ill-treatment, and among the recommendations made to China by the UN
Committee Against Torture in 2008. Both organisations urge China to reconsider
accepting this recommendation. 
Despite some recent
amendments made to the Criminal Procedure Law, torture remains rampant in
China. Our organisations are concerned about ongoing reports of torture,
beatings and other abusive treatment in the Tibet Autonomous Region and
neighbouring Tibetan prefectures and counties, in particular of Tibetan monks
and nuns. Furthermore, both organisations are concerned that investigations
into torture allegations are rarely carried out and that those responsible fail
to be prosecuted. 
For example, on 23
November 2013, Chinese officials arrested Ngawang Jampel, a senior Tibetan
Buddhists scholar. One month later, his body was returned to his family with
clear signs that he was beaten and tortured during his detention.[1]

Our organisations
urge China to close the compliance gap on important matters such as the
absolute prohibition of torture and ill-treatment, notably by fully and
effectively implementing the recommendations by the UN Committee Against
Torture. 
Our organisations
are also concerned about assertions by China that are far removed from reality
notably that there are no arbitrary detentions in China and that human rights
defenders are not subjected to reprisals. 
Since October 2013,
the month of China’s Universal Periodic Review (UPR), TCHRD has documented the
detention of 94 Tibetan political prisoners, including 23 monastics. In Sichuan
Province, some counties have implemented a system of collective punishment for
families, villages, and monasteries associated with self-immolators.[2]
Our organisations were
also deeply saddened to learn about the death of Chinese human rights defender Cao Shunli on 14 March 2014, after she was
denied medical treatment in detention. Cao Shunli was arrested in September
2013 to prevent her from traveling to Geneva to attend a training on UN human
rights mechanisms ahead of China’s UPR. Cao Shunli was leading since 2008 a campaign to demand the Chinese Government to allow
genuine civil society participation in China’s UPR. 
Our organisations call upon the Human Rights Council
and the international community to ensure
accountability for Cao’s death as well as
for the human rights abuses she died trying to bring to the attention of the
international community. The Council
needs to assume its responsibility in monitoring that there are no future
threats to the participation of civil society representatives. Death is too
high a price for cooperating with the UN human rights system.
We thank you. 



[1] http://www.tchrd.org/2013/12/diru-crackdown-senior-tibetan-buddhist-scholar-beaten-to-death-in-police-custody/



[2] http://www.tchrd.org/2014/02/china-announces-unprecedented-harsh-measures-to-deter-self-immolations-in-tibets-dzoege-county/ 