Myanmar (ex-Burma):  End the prosecution of Rohingya human rights defender Kyaw Hla Aung
July  4, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Myanmar (ex-Burma) / 2014 / JulyMyanmar (ex-Burma): End the prosecution of Rohingya human rights defender Kyaw Hla AungBangkok-Geneva-Paris-Rangoon,
July 4, 2014. The Burmese Government must end the prosecution of Rohingya
human rights defender Kyaw Hla Aung and immediately release him, the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, an FIDH-OMCT joint
programme, and the Alternative ASEAN Network on Burma (ALTSEAN-Burma) said
today. 
 
On July 7, 2014, Kyaw
Hla Aung, a prominent human rights lawyer, will appear before
the Sittwe District Court to face various charges, including “rioting and being
armed with deadly weapons “(Article 148 of the Criminal Code) and “injuring a
civil servant, interfering with his official duties” (Article 333 of the
Criminal Code).
 
“The
ongoing detention of Kyaw Hla Aung is symptomatic of the Burmese Government’s
relentless persecution of Rohingya and its misguided policies in Arakan State”, said FIDH President Karim Lahidji. “Kyaw Hla Aung is a moderate
and well-respected member of the Rohingya community. Instead of keeping him
behind bars, the Burmese Government should release him and work with him to
promote dialogue between Buddhist and Muslim communities, including Rohingya,
in Arakan State”, he added.
 
On
July 15, 2013, authorities in Sittwe Township, Arakan State, arrested Kyaw Hla Aung in connection with
Rohingya internally displaced person (IDP) protests against attempts by the
Government to register them as ‘Bengali’ in April 2013. Clashes between
Rohingya IDPs and immigration officials during the protests at Thetkalpyin IDP
camp in Sittwe Township forced the authorities to suspend the registration
process. However, Kyaw Hla Aung was not present during the protests and, in
fact, had tried to contact camp leaders in order to advise them to keep the
protests peaceful.
 
“The arrest and persecution of Kyaw Hla Aung has
all appearances of a reprisal seeking to quell protest by the Rohingya. The
level of violations remains disquieting. Any way forward must respect an
absolute baseline consensus that those who defend the rights of others,
including minority populations, need to be protected”, said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
 
Former
United Nations Special Rapporteur on Human Rights in Burma Tomás Ojea Quintana,
who repeatedly called for Kyaw Hla Aung’s release, described him as a prisoner
of conscience and said his detention was arbitrary. Kyaw Hla Aung suffers from
hypertension and stomach problems that require regular medication. 
 
In
1986, Kyaw Hla Aung was imprisoned for two years for writing an appeal to the
authorities on behalf of local farmers whose land had been confiscated. In
1990, he was arrested during a crackdown on Rohingya activists and spent the
next 10 years in jail. In June 2012, Government authorities detained him, along
with several other Rohingya aid workers, for his alleged involvement in the
sectarian unrest that hit Arakan State. He was released in August 2012.
 
For
more information, please contact:
·
FIDH: Arthur Manet: +33 1 43 55 25 18
· OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39 