Iran:  Sentencing of Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh to 33 years in jail
March 12, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2019 / MarchIran: Sentencing of Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh to 33 years in jail​New informationIRN 001 / 0618 / OBS 085.1
Sentencing /
Arbitrary
detention
Iran
March 12, 2019

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of
FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
Iran.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by the League for the Defence of Human
Rights in Iran (LDDHI) about the conviction and sentencing of Ms. Nasrin
Sotoudeh, a human rights lawyer and 2012 laureate of the European
Parliament’s Sakharov Prize, to 33 years in jail and 148 lashes. 
 
According to the information
received, on March 9, 2019, Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh received a copy of a court
ruling issued after a one-day hearing held in absentia on December 30,
2018, by Branch 28 of the Islamic Revolution Court in Tehran. The court found
her guilty and sentenced her to 33 years in jail and 148 lashes on the
following seven charges: “gathering and collusion against national security”
(Article 610 of the Islamic Penal Code), “spreading propaganda against the
system” (Article 500), “effective membership of the illegal and anti-security
splinter groups Defenders of Human Rights Centre, LEGAM[1]
and National Council of Peace” (Article 498); “encouraging people to commit
corruption and prostitution, and providing the means for it” (Article 639),
“appearing without the sharia-sanctioned hijab at the premises of the
magistrate’s office” (Article 638); “disrupting public order and calm” (Article
618) and “spreading falsehoods with intent to disturb the public opinion”
(Article 698).
 
 Judge Mohammad Moqisseh sentenced her to the
maximum punishment in each and every case, i.e. a total of 29 years. In addition,
he used the provisions of Article 134 of the same law to impose four more years
of imprisonment on the ground that Ms. Sotoudeh had committed “more than three
crimes.” No lawyer represented her before the court, as she refused to appoint
a lawyer to protest against provisions restricting the right of those accused
of national security crimes to be represented by a lawyer of their choosing.
Ms. Sotoudeh has 20 days to appeal the ruling. 
 
The
Prosecutor argued in the indictment that Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh “removed her hijab
during family visits in Evin prison” and “removed her headscarf at the
Prosecutor’s Office”; “was a prominent, active and organised member of
Defenders of Human Rights Centre, LEGAAM and National Council of Peace”;
“received the amount of 50,000 Euros in disguise of Sakharov prize for her
subversive actions”; “was involved in a call for a referendum”; “helped the
establishment of house churches”; “made false statements about detention of
women who took off their hijab, accusing police agents of abuse”; “encouraged
the people to commit corruption and prostitution"; and “was involved, alongside elements
affiliated to the Gonabadi Order of Dervishes, in action outside the Evin
prison.”
 
The Observatory expresses its deepest concern
about the sentencing and continuing arbitrary detention of Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh,
which appears to be only aimed at punishing her for her legitimate human rights
activities.
 
The
Observatory further recalls that Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh was already arrested and
detained in June 2018 to serve a five-year prison sentence in a separate case (see
background information). 
 
The Observatory urges the Iranian authorities to
immediately and unconditionally release Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh and to guarantee
her physical integrity and psychological well-being. The Observatory further
urges the Iranian authorities to drop all the charges and end all judicial
harassment against her.
 
Background information: 
 
In
August 2015, Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh was summoned for interrogation following the
renewal of her lawyer’s licence, nine months after she held a sit-in to protest
against a three-year suspension of her licence. The summons did not specify any
charges. However, she was unable to attend the interrogation due to a surgery
on her foot at the time. Her husband went to the court in her place and
presented medical documents regarding her condition and her inability to
respond to the summons.
 
She
was then given three weeks to go to the Islamic Revolution Court. However, when
she did go, she was not allowed in, as a number of lawyers are barred from
entering the court’s building. Ms. Sotoudeh was also summoned to appear before
the Islamic Revolution Court on September 4, 2016. However, she was not allowed
inside the court on the pretext that the colour and design of her clothing were
not proper and on this occasion she was neither tried nor notified of any
pending charges. However, it was established after her arrest in 2018 that the
court had sentenced her in absentia to five years on the same day. 
 
On June 13, 2018, security forces arrested Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh at her
home in Tehran and transferred her to the capital’s Evin prison. Upon her
arrest, she was presented with an arrest warrant and was told that she was
being taken to serve a five-year prison sentence, which had been handed down
against her in absentia. Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh was not shown the court’s
ruling related to the sentence and had not been informed of the conviction or
the sentence prior to her arrest. This is in flagrant contravention of domestic
and international fair trial standards. Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh filed an appeal
against the sentence. At the time of publication, it was still pending.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Iran asking them to:
 
i. Immediately
and unconditionally release Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh, as well
as all other human rights defenders arbitrarily detained in Iran;
 
ii.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical integrity and psychological
well-being of Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh, as well as that of all other human rights
defenders in Iran;
 
iii. Drop
all charges pending against Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh and meanwhile ensure that all
judicial proceedings against her are carried out in full compliance with her
right to a fair trial, as protected under international law;
 
iv. Put
an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Ms.
Nasrin Sotoudeh as well as that all other human rights defenders arbitrarily
detained in the country, and ensure they are able to carry out their activities
without hindrance;
 
v.
Conform to all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular
its Articles 1, 6, 9, 11 and 12;
 
vi.
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
in accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Iran.
 
Addresses:

• Leader of the Islamic Republic, H.E. Ayatollah Sayed
Ali Khamenei, Fax: + 98 21 441 2030, Email: info_leader@leader.ir; Twitter:
@khamenei_ir
• President Hassan Rouhani, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: + 98 21 644 54811;
Email: media@rouhani.ir; Twitter: @HassanRouhani (English) and @Rouhani_ir
(Persian).
• Head of the Judiciary, H.E. Hojattolislam Ebrahim Ra'eesi, Islamic Republic of
Iran, Fax: +98 21 879 6671 / +98 21 3 311 6567, Email: info@dadiran.ir /
info@dadgostary-tehran.ir / info@bia-judiciary.ir
• Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mohammad Javad Zarif, Islamic Republic of Iran,
Fax: +98-21-66743149; matbuat@mfa.gov.ir
• Secretary General, High Council for Human Rights, Mr. Mohammed Javad
Larijani, Islamic Republic of Iran. Email: info@humanrights-iran.ir
• H.E. Mr. Javad Amin-Mansour, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the
Islamic Republic of Iran to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41
22 7330203, Email: mission.iran@ties.itu.int
• H.E. Mr. Peiman Seadat, Ambassador, Embassy of Iran in Brussels,
Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 762 39 15. Email: secreteriat@iranembassy.be
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Iran in your respective
countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, March 12, 2019
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this
programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.  




[1] Campaign for
“Step by Step Abolition of the Death Penalty” 