Myanmar (ex-Burma):  OMCT is gravely concerned about the health conditions of Mr. Khun Tun Oo, Major General Hso Ten, Mr. Sai Hla Aung and Mr. Sai Nyunt Lwin
February 28, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Myanmar (ex-Burma) / 2011 / FebruaryMyanmar (ex-Burma): OMCT is gravely concerned about the health conditions of Mr. Khun Tun Oo, Major General Hso Ten, Mr. Sai Hla Aung and Mr. Sai Nyunt LwinCase MMR 170211

Health concern/ Fear for the safety 
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) requests your urgent intervention in the following situation
in Myanmar/ Burma.
 
Brief
description of the situation
 
The
International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable
source and Antenna International, a member organisation of OMCT
SOS-Torture Network, about the poor health condition of Mr. Khun
Tun Oo,
a senior political leader of the Shan, the largest of Myanmar’s
ethnic minorities, member of the Committee Representing People’s
Parliament (CRPP)[1] and
chairman of the political party Shan Nationalities League for
Democracy, as a result of harsh conditions of detention in Putao
prison, where he is serving a 93-year prison sentence.  

According
to the information received, Mr. Khun Tun Oo, 67 years, is suffering
from various health problems, among others, diabetes, peptic ulcer,
and arthritis. He has also swollen legs due to lack of exercise and
medical treatment. Furthermore, Putao prison,
which is located in Kachin State in
the north of the country, is reportedly cold and damp, and therefore
conditions are very harsh. 

OMCT
has also been informed that Mr. Khun Tun Oo’s family members have
barely been permitted to visit him, also because he is detained in a
remote prison, situated far away from the family’s residence.
According to the same information, Mr. Khun Tun Oo is not getting the
adequate medical attention, and is not permitted to get a medical
check-up outside the prison, although the family has applied for
permission on several occasions. 

Mr.
Khun Tun Oo was arrested on 9 February 2005 along with Major General
Hso Ten, a
member of the Shan State Peace Council, as
well as with Mr. Sai Hla Aung
and Mr. Sai Nyunt Lwin,
both members of State Army North Ceasefire Group and Shan National
League for Democracy, after they attended a
private meeting of senior political representatives to discuss the
authorities' plans for political transition, on 7 February 2005. All
four men were charged, among other things, of high treason and
sentenced to lengthy prison terms. They were allegedly held
incommunicado for some time during their detention and suffered acts
of ill-treatment. During the court hearings they were not granted
unconditional access to lawyers of their choice. 

OMCT
is also gravely concerned about the health condition of Mr.
Sai Hla Aung and General Hso Ten. Mr. Sai Hla Aung, who is being held
in Kyaukphyu prison, in Arakan State,
serving a 79-years prison sentence, is reportedly suffering of a
hyperthyroid condition, diabetes and heart disease. General Hso Ten,
74 years old, is suffering from a number of health problems, among
others, diabetes and heart problems, and he is at high risk of
loosing his eyesight, but he has been denied any medical treatment.
He is currently detained in Sittwe Prison, in Arakan State,
serving a 106 year sentence. Nothing is known to date about the
health situation of Mr. Sai Nyunt Lwin,
sentenced to 85-years in prison. 

The
International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its deepest concern about
the health conditions of Mr. Khun Tun Oo, Major General Hso
Ten, Mr. Sai Hla Aung and Mr. Sai Nyunt Lwin,
and urges the competent authorities to grant them immediate access to
independent medical doctors and to guarantee that they receive
adequate medical care as
provided for by international human rights standards, including the
UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. 

 
Background
information
In
Myanmar/ Burma, prison conditions are very harsh (including poor
sanitation, unclean water and denial of adequate food) and being held
behind bars can have life-threatening consequences. The Assistance
Association for Political Prisoners (Burma)
has recorded the deaths of
146
political activists during incarceration since 1988, as a direct
result of severe torture, denial of food and medical treatment. Many
others remain currently detained and are in poor health due to harsh
prison conditions and denial of adequate medical care[2].
The authorities also systematically transfer political prisoners to
remote prisons, far from their families and where there are no
doctors. This affects adversely on both the prisoners’ physical and
mental health.
 
Action
requested
 
Please
write to the authorities in Myanmar/ Burma urging
them to:
 
i.          Guarantee,
in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr.
Khun Tun Oo, Major General Hso Ten, Mr. Sai
Hla Aung and Mr. Sai Nyunt Lwin; 

ii.         
Immediately release them on medical urgent
grounds;
iii.         Guarantee
unconditional and regular access to their respective lawyers and
families, as well as guarantee that they are promptly examined by
independent medical doctors and receive adequate medical care in
accordance with, inter alia,
the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners; 

iv.         Ensure
the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the
country in accordance with national laws and international human
rights standards.
 
Addresses
Minister
	for Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, No. 10 Naypyidaw,
	Myanmar; Tel: +95 67 412 040/ 069/ 072; Fax: +95 67 412 016/ 439;
	E-mail: ddg.gad@gad.gov.mm 

Minister
	of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Nyan Win, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Bldg.
	(19), Naypyitaw, Myanmar 

Attorney
	General, Office of the Attorney General, 101 Pansodan Street,
	Kyauktada Township, Yangon, Myanmar, Fax: + 95 1 371 028/ 282 449 /
	282 990 

Permanent
	Mission of Myanmar to the United Nations in Geneva, 47 avenue Blanc,
	1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Tel: + 41 22 906 98 70; Fax: + 41 22 732
	89 19; Email: mission.myanmar@ties.itu.int 


Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Myanmar/ Burma in
your respective country.
 
***
Geneva,
17 February 2011. 

 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in
your reply.




[1]
The
CRPP
	was formed in 1998 as result of a coalition agreement between
	National League for Democracy (NLD) and other ethnic parties among
	which also is the Shan Nationalities League for Democracy (SNLD).
	The CRPP was consequence of the ongoing refusal of  the Burman
	Military Junta to recognize the results of the 1990 elections.


[2]
See
	also for example OMCT Urgent appeal MMR 211210. 