Events of the 26th of June for the International Day in Support of Victims
June 26, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionAssistance to victims  / Reports and Publications / 2013 / JuneEvents of the 26th of June for the International Day in Support of VictimsEvents of the 26th of June for the International Day in Support of Victims7 pages / 1.32 MBNothing can
justify torture under any circumstances!
On June 26, 1987 the United Nations
Convention against Torture came into force. A decade later, to eradicate torture
worldwide and assure the effective implementation of the Convention, the UN
General Assembly officially proclaimed June 26 as the International Day in Support
of Victims of Torture.
We have to to be mobilized for this day to
pursue together the fight against impunity and strongly reaffirm that respect
for human dignity means that such practices are forbidden under all
circumstances.
On this day dedicated to the victims of
torture and ill-treatment, OMCT and its SOS-Torture Networkorganize events all around the world to promote
their support for victims of torture.
Nothing can justify torture under any
circumstances! With the OMCT, sign the Manifesto
OMCT
International Secretariat
June
20, Brussels: OMCT Secretary General, Gerald Staberock, briefed the EU Parliament Sub-Committee on Human Rights
about lessons learnt in the fight against torture in North Africa and the
Southern Neighborhood. The hearing was part of the annual hearing on the
occasion of June 26, the UN Day for Victims of Torture. OMCT Secretary General highlighted
key challenges in fighting torture in the region two years after the Arab
Spring. He laid out the need to make the fight against torture a central
element in any transition process, stressed the need to strengthen local civil
society against torture, inject law reforms for the prevention of torture and
to tackle the lack of accountability and reform within the security structures
in the region. He also reminded about the challenge to anchor universal human
rights norms clearly in the new constitutional and legal frameworks. The
presentation was also based on the work the OMCT is conducting since two years
with offices in Tunis and Tripoli supporting anti-torture reforms in the two
countries.
For a webstream of the hearing:
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/ep-live/en/committees/video?event=20130620-0900-COMMITTEE-DROI





June 25, 7 pm, Vienna (University of Vienna):


On the occasion of the 20th anniversary of the Vienna
World Conference on Human Rights, a Human
Rights Talk entitled « Key Challenges to the Absolute Prohibition of Torture: ways towards Enforcement and
Implementation »
will be organised.The podium discussion will be held by:
-         
Edita Lintl (Member of HEMAYAT, Center for
Victims of War and Torture, Vienna)
-         
Manfred Nowak (University
of Vienna, Research Director of the Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Human Rights,
former UN Special Rapporteur on Torture) 
-         
Gerald Staberock (Secretary-General
of the World Organisation Against Torture – OMCT) 
-         
Henri Tiphagne (President of the Asian
Forum for Human Rights and Development, Director of the  Human Rights
Organisation People’s Watch - India)  
For a webstream of the entire event: 
Libya
June 25
10 am – 1 pm: Round-table
– “No to torture inside jails”: proposed by the Victims Organization for
Human Rights, with the cooperation of the OMCT, this round-table will discuss
important issues such as the position of Islam towards the phenomenon of
torture, the role of media in the fight against torture, and the situation in
Libya before and after the February 17th Revolution.
4 pm: in cooperation with
the Tripoli Human Rights Film Festival, the OMCT
organised a film screenings : “The
Forgotten” (Carles Caparrós, 2010, Spain). Synopsis: In the Western world,
mental illnesses are considered diseases; in a number of African countries,
psychological problems are often seen as a sign of being possessed by the
devil. Marked individuals are bound in chains and excluded from mainstream
society. The protagonist of this film is the charismatic Gregoire, who runs a
network of centres that care for the mentally ill and homeless in the Ivory
Coast and Burkina Faso. In an environment where medical care is only available
to those who can pay, his centres are 
the only hope for these people. “The Forgotten” is about the importance
of human dignity amid poverty and ruin.
5.30 pm – 7 pm: Concert – Songs celebrating the February 17th
Revolution and the city of Benghazi. In presence of Malik L, DJ Ezooo, Mohammed
Busaifi and Volcano & Black Tiger
8 pm: film screening “Burma VJ”(Anders Østergaard, 2009, Denmark). Synopsis: “Burma
VJ” reveals the incredible bravery of Burmese video journalists during the
uprising of September 2007 against the military junta ruling the country. Going
beyond the occasional news clip from Burma, “Burma VJ” brings us close to
Burma’s video journalists who insist on keeping up the flow of news from their
closed country despite risking torture and life in jail. Armed with small
handycams they make their undercover reportages, smuggle the material out of
the country, have it broadcast back into Burma via satellite and offered as
free usage for international media.
June 26
9 am – 6.30 pm: Public
Conference – “Drawing force from the past to master our future” – in
cooperation with the National Council for Civil Liberties and Human Rights in
Benghazi. This conference aims to expose the past, present, and future of the
fight against torture in Libya, focusing on issues of collective trauma and
transitional justice. The first session will recall abuses of the Qaddafi
regime before the February 17th Revolution and strategies employed
to protect victims. Then, Libyan civil society stakeholders from across the
country will share their views on the current situation and practices of
torture, ill-treatment, arbitrary detention, and enforced disappearance.
Finally, the president of the Tunisian Organization Against Torture will
present international and regional standards against torture and discuss the
rights of detainees, and will ask what Libya and Libyans can do in the future
to construct safe communities guided by the rule of law.



1 pm: Inauguration of ‘Graffiti
against torture’ – a mural made by Benghazi and Tunisian artists, in
cooperation with the Cultural Council of the Union for the Mediterranean .
This mural is the result of a creative workshop with Benghazi youth




and the participation of three Tunisian
artists – Willis from Tunis and two graffiti artists from the Zwewla group – as well as two
graffiti artists from Benghazi, Hamzawi and Nadeer.






7 pm – 9 pm: Poetry night
During all events, check out live coverage by bloggers
of “Libyablog”: follow #SOSTorture and http://libyablog.org – in cooperation with RFI – Atelier des Médias
Tunisia
La Tunisie commémorait la journée internationale pour le soutien aux victimes de la tortureJune 26, all day, avenue
Bourguiba: OMCT, together with 20 other
organisations will be mounting a tent on Avenue Bourguiba. Video clips will be
diffuse and materials distributed (brochures, stickers, badge buttons)
June
26, Maison de la culture Ibn Rachiq: closure of the photo
exhibition “Sous le Jasmin”:
-         
10 am: press conference, Maison de
la culture Ibn Rachiq. Press contact: Emtyez Bellali: +216 24 34 21 50, eb@omct.org 
-         
5 - 6 pm: theatre play “Parole
d’Hugo” from the book Le dernier jour
d’un condamné (V. Hugo)
-         
6 - 7 pm: homage to all persons
portrayed in the photo exhibition



June 27, 5 pm, Maison de la culture Ibn Khouldoun: OMCT together with Dignity, OTRPS, REMDH and
LTDH will sponsor a theatre play entitled “Syloun”,




which is
about solitary confinement, the life of detainees in there and ill-treatment
to which they were subjected.






The Philippines
The United Against Torture Coalition
(UATC)-Philippines, including Philippine Alliance of Human Rights Advocates (PAHRA), Medical
Action Group (MAG), Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP), three members of the SOS-Torture Network, organises two events in the framework of the
International Day in Support of Victims of Torture:
-         
June 19, 9 am – 17pm, Manila: a workshop entitled “Civil Society Organizations’ Learning on the
Recommendations for Effective Implementation of the Anti-Torture Law” was
conducted. The
objective of the workshop was to contribute in generating solutions for
strengthening implementation of the law in terms of documentation,
investigation and prosecution of alleged cases of torture, increased number of
victims will receive effective medical and psychological services and legal
support, and in breaking torture impunity in the country.
-         
June 26, Manila: the UATC organises, for the
seventh consecutive year, the run “Basta! Run Against Torture” (BRAT). This
year theme is “Make Philippines a Torture free zone”. This year’s BRAT will
focus on Torture Free Detention Centres – an important step to ensure the
effective implementation of the law. Aside from demanding accountability of
jail officers and overseers of detention centres in ensuring that torture and
ill-treatment is not practiced through formal compliance procedures and education
of officers and detainees, the UATC is also proposing more pro-active
positioning in monitoring by all concerned parties with emphasis in the
community’s participation.
June 26, 9 am, Manila: KARAPATAN organises a
Forum on International Day in Support of victims of Torture.Victims of torture and a
representative from a victim’s family will testify.
Colombia
June 26, 5.30 pm – 8.00 pm, Bogota
(Biblioteca Nacional): OMCT and la Coalición Colombiana contra la tortura will
organise a panel discussion on the situation of torture in Colombia. It will be
follow by a short play represented by “Teatro la Candelaria”. Press
contact : Betty Monzon, prensa@reiniciar.org        


These events are realized with the financial aid of the European
Union, the Foundation Oak, the
Swiss Confederation and Sigrid Rausing Trust. The content
of these events lies in the responsibility of the OMCT only and cannot be
considered as reflecting the position of the European Union, the Foundation
Oak, the Swiss Confederation or Sigrid Rausing Trust.[1]http://www.omct.org/international-campaigns/campaign-prohibition-torture/#campaign_signing_form 