Bangladesh:  State of emergency causing the death of at least 19 persons, including a minor, by security forces
January 26, 2007
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2007 / JanuaryBangladesh: State of emergency causing the death of at least 19 persons, including a minor, by security forcesGeneva, 26 January 2007. The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) expresses its deep concern about the recent events in Bangladesh, particularly since a state of emergency was declared in the country. From 12 to 21 January 2007, 19 persons, including a minor, were reportedly killed either in crossfire or in detention by security forces. The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned by reports from ODHIKAR, a member of OMCT SOS-Torture network, on the violent repression by security forces since the state of emergency was proclaimed on 11 January 2007. A total number of at least 19 persons, including a minor, were killed by members of the army, the police and the Rapid Action Battalion (RAB), an elite anti-crime and anti-terrorism force across the country. Many others were reportedly arrested and detained. President Iajuddin Ahmed, who then quit as head of the interim government, declared a state of emergency in the face of violent political protests and a multiparty alliance threatening to blockade voting places before the planned 22 January elections, which were then indefinitely postponed. Under the state of emergency, some basic constitutional rights, including those of freedom of speech, assembly, and movement, have been suspended. Furthermore, law enforcement agencies have been allowed to enter into any place without showing any reason and arrest any individual on suspicion. The army has been giving authority to arrest anyone without warrant in order to ensure “peaceful” atmosphere before and after the first scheduled elections. Since the new caretaker government assumed power, it has called on the army to stay in the streets pending elections. According to reports from ODHIKAR, at least nine persons were killed during crossfire. Ten persons, including a minor, died while in detention. Reports indicate that they were subjected to torture and ill-treatment. Two of the ten died after trying to escape.   OMCT is very concerned about these reports and urges the authorities to put an immediate end to these extrajudicial killings, arbitrary arrest and acts of torture by security forces. OMCT calls upon the authorities to launch a thorough and impartial investigation into these allegations, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law for impunity should not prevail. Finally, OMCT urges the authorities to guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international humanitarian law and human rights standards. Geneva, 26 January 2007 Contact: Alexandra Kossin: 0041 22 809 49 39 