Around the world, poverty and discrimination fuel torture and other forms of violence
June 26, 2008
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Urgent Interventions / 2008 / JuneAround the world, poverty and discrimination fuel torture and other forms of violenceTorture is an offence and outrage against us all, but it is often the poorest and most marginalised populations who experience its most direct and brutal impact. For this reason, OMCT’s fight against torture is also a fight against economic and social injustice.   Eric Sottas, Secretary General, OMCT Geneva, 26 June 2008. On this, the International Day in Support of Victims of Torture, OMCT underlines that all too often, torture and poverty go hand in hand. Experience shows that, around the world, the majority of victims of torture and other forms of violence come from the most disadvantaged social groups. Members of marginalised communities are not only more vulnerable to such abuses, they are also least able to claim their rights and seek protection and redress. Supporting the victims of torture therefore means giving voice to women and children, indigenous communities, the poor, ethnic, racial and religious minorities and all those forced to live on the margins of society.  In some cases, acts of torture and violence are carried out by states themselves in an attempt to suppress public protest against socio-economic policies or to silence those who seek to defend economic, social and cultural rights. In others, they are used to remove opposition to major infrastructure projects, the establishment of special economic zones, clearance of informal settlements or the exploitation of natural resources. And more and more, torture is carried out at the hands of non-state actors such as paramilitary and guerrilla groups, organised criminal gangs, private individuals or security companies protecting economic interests – including those of multinational corporations engaged in mining and agri-industrial activities.  If torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and other forms of violence are to be eliminated, then their economic, social and cultural root causes must be, first, understood and, secondly, effectively addressed. The converse equally applies: acting to reduce levels of violence in a given society is a fundamental step toward ensuring the widespread enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights. Around the world, conflict and lack of security expose citizens to situations that severely impede their possibility of escaping from poverty, of working in just and favourable conditions, of providing care and education to their children and of enjoying an adequate standard of living and the highest attainable standard of health. For this reason OMCT is committed to addressing the phenomena that create a context for human rights violations, including the deterioration of social fabric, growing income gaps, weakening of the State’s regulatory capacity, and the repression of manifestations of linguistic, cultural or religious identity. OMCT calls upon civil society to remain vigilant to the risk that incidents of torture and violence directed against the poorest and most marginalised elements of society become still more frequent over the coming months, in the context of growing public unrest provoked by rising global food prices and increasing food insecurity. At the same time, it is imperative that governments recognise and respect the right of their citizens to peaceful demonstration. Meeting unrest generated by deteriorating living standards with violent repression only heightens social tensions and creates a context for further violence. OMCT also encourages governments to take the necessary steps – including subventions and even emergency distribution - to minimise the impact of rising food prices on the poorest and most vulnerable sectors of society. The right to peaceful demonstration, the right to work and the right to food and an adequate standard of living are all guaranteed under international and regional instruments. The current difficult global economic climate offers no grounds whatsoever for the erosion of these rights. Nor should it be invoked as a justification by States for failing to meet their clear obligations to ensure that no citizen is subjected to torture and that those who do fall victim to torture obtain redress, compensation and rehabilitation. For further information, please contact: OMCT: Michael Miller, + 41 79 743 68 63 