Greece:  Ongoing judicial and police harassment against the human right lawyer Electra Koutra
December  8, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Greece / 2016 / DecemberGreece: Ongoing judicial and police harassment against the human right lawyer Electra KoutraUA Greece translation GRK3 pages / 87 KB


CASE GRE 081216
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
 
Police harassment / Intimidation
The International
Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Greece. 
Description of the situation:
The International
Secretariat of OMCT has been
informed by reliable sources about the ongoing judicial and police harassment
against the human right lawyer Ms. Electra
Koutra, President of the Hellenic Action for Human Rights “Pleiades”[1].
According to the information received, on
September 6, 2016 Ms. Koutra was informed that on August 11, 2016, a police
officer, member of the Thessaloniki Police, filed a complaint for “insult to
his personality” requesting the award of 80,000 euros in civil damages against
Ms. Koutra. This action for damages was filed in response to a complaint filed
by Ms. Koutra on June 5, 2013, after she accused the same police officer of
locking her up in a cell and denying the right to see her client (see background
information). Ms. Koutra has time until December 9 to present her arguments in
writing to the judge in charge of the case, who, by December 24, will issue a
date for a court hearing.
Moreover, on October 4, 2016, Ms.
Koutra has also been summonsed as a suspect, and then as a witness in relation
to a criminal a case in which she represents five Syrian refugee children aged
between 12 and 16 allegedly arrested and ill-treated on September 27, 2016, for
carrying plastic toy guns in a bag in the street in Athens[2]. This summons contravenes
the legal principle that lawyers should not be called to testify in cases tin
which they act as lawyers[3].
The International
Secretariat of OMCT expresses
its concerns about the ongoing police harassment against Ms. Koutra, which appears
to aim at sanctioning and putting an end to her legitimate human rights
activities, especially considering the disproportionate amount asked for
compensation by the police officer.
Finally, the International
Secretariat of OMCT calls
upon the authorities to drop the action for damages against her and put an
immediate end to her intimidation and harassment, including at judicial level.
Background information[4]:
In the night of June 4 to June 5, 2013,
Ms. Electra Koutra was arbitrarily detained during 20 minutes in a cell at the
Democratias Square police station in Thessaloniki, where she had gone in her
capacity of lawyer for the Greek Transgender Support Association (GTSA) to meet
a client, a transgender person who complained of police abuse, in the context
of an extensive police operation leading to the arbitrary arrest of many
transgender persons on the eve of the Thessaloniki LGBT Pride, on June 14 and
15, 2013.

After she had been prevented from seeing her client, at 00:25 am, Ms. Electra
Koutra called the police emergency number to protest. Subsequently, she was
authorised to enter the station. The police officer on duty immediately threw
her into a police’s station cell together with a number of other detainees
without providing any further reason for her detention. Despite Ms. Electra
Koutra's protests, about ten other police officers voiced their support with
the police officer and taunted her, saying that she “asked to be locked in”.
When Ms. Electra Koutra was eventually let
out of the cell some 20 minutes later, the officer on duty refused to register
a complaint and asked her to leave the police station, shortly after 1 am. A
few hours later, Ms. Koutra went to Lefkos Pyrgos police station to file a
complaint for “torture and other forms of offense to human dignity” (a felony),
“abuse of authority”, “unlawful detention”, “use of violence”, “abduction”,
“threats”, and “unprovoked insult with actions”. The Public Prosecutor,
urgently informed of the incident, refused to arrest the police officers under
the pretext that they were acting while on duty.
Respectively on December 30, 2014, and
June 30, 2015, prosecutors of the Thessaloniki First Instance and Appeals Court
dismissed Ms. Koutra’s 2013 criminal complaint as groundless. According to the
information received, the proceedings were marred by witness intimidation. In
particular, one of the incriminating witnesses would have been coerced by
police officers into withdrawing her testimony, previously made in an
officially notarized statement on June 19, as well as in a complaint filed
against police officers on July 11, 2013. 
In December 2015, Ms. Electra Koutra
decided to file a complaint before the European Court of Human Rights. The case
is currently under examination.
Actions required:

Please write to the Greek authorities urging them to:

i. Immediately and
unconditionally stop the judicial harassment against Ms. Electra Koutra;

ii. Ensure in all circumstances that human rights defenders are able to carry
out their legitimate human rights activities without any hindrance;

iii. Conform with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly, especially
article 1 and 12.2;

iv. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Greece.
Addresses:
·     Prime Minister of Greece, Mr. Alexis
Tsipras, Email: mail@primeminister.gr
·    
Alternate Minister of Immigration Policy of Greece, Mr. Giannis
Mouzalas, Fax: +30 213 136 4418, Email: gram.anaplypourgou@ypes.gr 
·    
Alternate Minister for Citizens Protection of Greece, Mr. Nikolaos
Toskas, Fax: +30 210 692 9764, Email: minister@mopocp.gov.gr 
·     Deputy Permanent Representative of Greece,
Mr. Ioannis Tsaousis, First Counsellor, Permanent Mission of Greece to the
United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 732 21 50; Email: grdel.gva@mfa.gr
·    
Secretary General for Transparency and Human Rights at the Ministry of
Justice, Ms. Maria Yannakaki, email: ggdad@justice.gov.gr Fax: 2107767406
·     Ambassador of Greece, H.E. Eleftheria
Galathianaki, Embassy of Greece in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: (+32) 2 545 5585,
Email: gremb.bru@mfa.gr
·     Permanent Representative of Greece, H.E.
Papastavrou Andreas, Permanent Representation to the European Union (EU), Fax:
+32 2 5515651, 5127912. Email: mea.bruxelles@rp-greece.be
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Greece in your
respective country.



[1] The NGO Pleiades is an NGO
registered in Greece since 2009 operating in the field of human rights and
carrying out awareness-raising campaigns, strategic litigation and offering pro
bono legal, medical, social and psychological support as well as
educational and cultural services to vulnerable social groups whose rights are
being threatened or violated. It cooperates at regional and international level
with inter-governmental institutions such as the Council of Europe and several
United Nations mechanisms and bodies.


[2] For more information see:
https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2016/09/greece-syrian-refugee-children-detained-for-carrying-toy-guns-allegedly-ill-treated-by-police/


[3] See Article
212(1)(b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, and Article 39(5) of the Code of
Lawyers.


[4] See the Observatory Urgent Appeal GRE 001 / 0613 / OBS 050 issued on June 13,
2013, available at: http://www.omct.org/human-rights-defenders/urgent-interventions/greece/2013/06/d22270/ 