Azerbaijan:  Sport For Rights: Letters to Pharrell Williams, Enrique Iglesias & Chris Brown ahead of their peformance at the Formula One European Grand Prix in Baku
April 21, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / Azerbaijan / 2016 / AprilAzerbaijan: Sport For Rights: Letters to Pharrell Williams, Enrique Iglesias & Chris Brown ahead of their peformance at the Formula One European Grand Prix in Baku
​Sport
 for Rights' campaign, of which OMCT is member, has been established to 
raise the problem of political prisoners in the context of the 
forthcoming international sporting events to be hosted by Azerbaijan. Sport for Rights Campaign sent three letters to Pharrell Williams, Enrique Iglesias and Chris Brown ahead of their peformance at the Formula One European Grand Prix in Baku.Please find them all in the PDF files attached.21
April 2016
Dear
Mr Williams,
We
are writing to you as members of the Sport for Rights campaign, which has been
working to raise human rights violations in Azerbaijan in the run-up to the
Formula One European Grand Prix. We are deeply disappointed by your decision to
perform in Baku on 19 June in connection with the European Grand Prix, given
the dire human rights situation in the country. We urge you to take a stand for
human rights in Azerbaijan and cancel your Baku performance.
We
have observed your support for the respect for the fundamental freedoms of all
people, such as your comments at the United Nations on the International Day of
Happiness last March, where you stated, “Happiness is your birthright”. You
spoke out again in October dedicating your song “Freedom” to the refugee crisis
in Europe, saying, “Freedom is something you’re born with. No one has to give
it to you”.
Unfortunately,
that is not the case for the people of Azerbaijan, whose rights have not been
respected or protected. Although 16 political prisoners were recently released,
dozens still languish in Azerbaijani jails, including journalists, bloggers,
youth activists, politicians, and religious followers guilty of nothing more
than disagreeing with the government. Despite the fact that they never should
have spent a single day in jail, the released prisoners have not been
rehabilitated, still under legal restrictions that impede their work and their
lives, with some facing travel bans preventing them from accessing urgently
needed medical attention. More broadly, civil society is attempting to work in
nearly impossible conditions, and a number of NGOs face politically motivated
criminal investigations. Journalists operate in a climate of fear, in a media
environment dominated by the state, where violent attacks – even murders –
against critical voices are committed with impunity. 
Among
Azerbaijan’s political prisoners is Khadija Ismayilova, a courageous
investigative journalist targeted for exposing corruption of the ruling elite
through stories that are continuing to unravel through the Panama Papers leak.
Another journalist, Seymur Hezi, is jailed on trumped-up hooliganism charges, following
years of pressure against him, such as being abducted and tortured, and warned
to stop criticising Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev. Opposition leader Ilgar
Mammadov, who attempted to challenge Aliyev’s presidency in 2013, has been
imprisoned for over three years, and has reported being repeatedly tortured.
Youth activist Ilkin Rustemzade has also been jailed for more than three years,
initially arrested in connection with a “Harlem Shake” video filmed in Baku.
As
with previous prestige events, the Azerbaijani authorities are using the
European Grand Prix in an attempt to whitewash their image, to distract
international attention from the human rights abuses taking place in the
country. Whether or not it is your intention, your performance would be used as
part of that cover-up, as propaganda for an increasingly authoritarian government.
Although you hope for your music to bring happiness to people all over the
world, a performance in Azerbaijan would serve to further the suffering of the
country’s political prisoners, and the many others whose rights have been
violated by the very government that will profit from the European Grand Prix.
But
you still have the chance to make this right. We urge you to cancel your Baku
performance, and to speak out publicly, condemning the human rights crackdown
in Azerbaijan, and calling for the immediate and unconditional release of
political prisoners. We call your attention to comments made by U2 lead singer
Bono on stage in Montreal last June, on the night of the opening ceremony of
the European Games in Baku. Bono specifically named six Azerbaijani political
prisoners, displayed their photos in the arena, and conveyed a message to President
Aliyev: “If anything happens to one of our friends, we will hold you
responsible!” Five of the prisoners he named have since been released. We
believe that you taking a strong stand for human rights could also have a
significant impact.
Please,
have some compassion for these courageous people, imprisoned for speaking the
truth and trying to change the situation in Azerbaijan for the better. Show the
world that you care, and that your silence cannot be bought.
Sincerely
yours,
Rebecca Vincent, Coordinator,
Sport for Rights campaign
Mike Harris,
Director, 89up
Thomas Hughes,
Executive Director, ARTICLE 19
Alice Klein,
President, Canadian Journalists for Free Expression
Nina Ognianova,
Europe and Central Asia Program Coordinator, Committee to Protect 
Journalists
Maran
Turner, Executive Director, Freedom Now
Danuta
Przywara, President of the Board, Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights
Florian Irminger,
Head of Advocacy, Human Rights House Foundation
Melody
Patry, Senior Advocacy Officer, Index on Censorship
Emin
Huseynov, Director, Institute for Reporters’ Freedom and Safety
Karim
Lahidji, President, International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)
Brigitte
Dufour, Director, International Partnership for Human Rights
James
Marriott, Co-Director, Platform
Petra Havlikova, Project Coordinator of the
Women’s Rights Are Human Rights 
Program, NESEHNUTI
Berit Lindeman, Senior Advisor, Norwegian
Helsinki Committee
Karin Karlekar,
Director, Free Expression Programs, PEN America
Ivana Skalova, Head
of the East European Program, People in Need
Aleksandra
Antonowicz-Cyglicka, Head of Programme, Action for the Global 
South, Polish Green Network
Gerald
Staberock, Secretary General, World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
Łukasz
Biernacki, Managing Director, You Aid FoundationPlease find the three Letters to Pharrell Williams, Enrique Iglesias and Chris Brown in the PDF files attached. 