Syria - Justice for the thousands of victims of enforced disappearances
August 30, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2017 / AugustSyria - Justice for the thousands of victims of enforced disappearancesSyria - Justice for the thousands of victims of enforced disappearances
We, the undersigned civil society organisations, commemorate
the victims of enforced disappearances in Syria and support their families,
urging the international community to support their demand to ensure justice,
truth and reparation and the immediate release of all those enforcedly held in
secret detention. As the world marks today the International Day of Victims of
Enforced Disappearances, our organisations condemn the continued and systematic
use of enforced disappearance which amounts to a
crime against humanity committed by the Syrian government. To silence
its critics and instil fear among communities, the Syrian government adopted
this practice towards its civilians and deployed it systematically after the
start of the peaceful protests in 2011.  We also call upon all armed groups to the
conflict to promptly release all those held disappeared and disclose their
fates and whereabouts.
Since the rise of the peaceful protests in Syria, our
organisations have been monitoring, documenting and campaigning on cases of hundreds
of Syrian individuals who have been subjected to enforced disappearance. Many
of those are women and children. Thousands of family members of those disappeared
are struggling for justice in their dangerous and impossible quest to find the
fate and whereabouts of their loved ones. They experience mental and emotional
anguish, while placed outside the protection of the law, and are often
blackmailed, manipulated and used by brokers. The struggle for justice must not
cease, accountability towards enforced disappearance must be high on the agenda
of all international peace making and negotiations on Syria which might take
place. 
We call for justice for Bassel Khartabil, a
Syrian-Palestinian software engineer and free speech activist, who was
subjected to extrajudicial execution by a military field court in October 2015
and whose fate only became known in August 2017. On 15 March 2012, Military
Intelligence had arrested Bassel Khartabil and held him incommunicado for eight
months.
We urge the Syrian government to immediately
disclose the fate and whereabouts of tens of thousands of victims of enforced
disappearances including Syrian lawyer Khalil Maatouk, whose whereabouts are
unknown since he was arrested at a government military checkpoint in October
2012. We call on the armed opposition groups to release Syrian human rights defenders,
including Razan Zaitouneh Samira Khalil, Wael Hamadeh and Nazem Hammadi, who
were kidnapped from the Violations Documentation Center (VDC) offices by armed,
masked gunmen in Douma on 9 December 2013. 
We collectively call for the immediate release of all
detainees held in Syria for peacefully exercising their legitimate rights to
freedom of expression and association. We urge both the Syrian government and
armed opposition groups to immediately disclose the fate of those disappeared
and stop arbitrarily arresting, abducting and detaining people for their
peaceful, journalistic, and humanitarian activities – in line with United
Nations Security Council resolution 2139, which demands ‘the release of all
arbitrarily detained’ in Syria.
We specifically call on the Syrian government to:
1.     Ensure that
no further executions of detained human rights defenders occur, and cease their
subjections to any military or ad-hoc court such as the Counter-Terrorism Court;
2.     Transfer all
detainees to known and recognised places of detention, and allow visits to
prisons by their families, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and other
relevant committees;
3.     Allow access
to UN officials including the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on Syria to conduct impartial investigations into the tens of thousands of enforced
disappearances in Syria since 2011;
4.     Ensure the
registration of all detainees' data, inform them of their detention grounds,
and ensure that they have access to the necessary healthcare;
5.     Promptly
accede, without making any reservation, to the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance; and implement it fully
under national law. In addition, Syrian authorities should recognize competence
of the Committee on Enforced Disappearances to receive and consider
communication from or on behalf of victims or other states parties;
6.     Ensure that
all participants in the search for victims of enforced disappearance, in
particular relatives of detainees, are protected from ill-treatment, smuggling,
retaliation, arrests and enforced disappearance;
7.     Ensure that
all survivors of enforced disappearance, released persons, families of deceased
victims, and their relatives receive justice, truth and reparation - including
material compensation, rehabilitation and restitution of property; ensure that
such a crime does not recur and that all those suspected of criminal
responsibility are brought to justice in fair trials before ordinary civilian
courts and without recourse to death penalty. 
We specifically call on armed opposition groups to:
1.    
Promptly release any person
subject to enforced disappearance;
2.    
Submit lists of the names of
the kidnapped and disappeared to their families and to relevant international
organisations 
Signed:
1.    
Amnesty International 
2.    
Badael Foundation
3.    
CIVICUS
4.    
EuroMed Rights (EMR)
5.    
Front Line Defenders
6.    
Families for Freedom
7.    
Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR)
8.    
HIVOS
9.    
Human Rights Guardians
10. Impunity Watch
11. International Federation for Human rights (FIDH)
12. International Service for Human Rights (ISHR)
13. Justice for Life Organization (JFL)
14. Palestinian Center for Development and Media Freedoms (MADA)
15. PAX for Peace
16. PEN international
17. Syrian Center for Legal Studies and Research (SCLSR)
18. Syrian Center for Media and Freedom of Expression (SCM)
19. Syrian Institute for Justice and Accountability (SIJ)
20. Syrians for Truth and Justice (STJ)
21. Syrian Network for Human Rights (SNHR)
22. The Day After (TDA)
23. The Syrian Archive
24. URNAMMU
25. Violations Documentation Center in Syria (VDC)
26. World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) 