India:  Authorities prevent Kashmiri human rights defender Khurram Parvez from travelling to Geneva for U.N. Human Rights Council session
September 15, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / India / 2016 / SeptemberIndia: Authorities prevent Kashmiri human rights defender Khurram Parvez from travelling to Geneva for U.N. Human Rights Council session

Asian Federation Against Involuntary
Disappearances (AFAD)
Asian Forum for Human Rights and Development
(FORUM-ASIA)
Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC)
Human Rights Defenders Alert – India (HRDA)
International Coalition Against Enforced
Disappearances (ICAED)
Odhikar
The Observatory
 
Joint Press Release
 
Indian authorities prevent Kashmiri
human rights defender Khurram Parvez from travelling to Geneva for U.N. Human
Rights Council session

Bangkok-Dhaka-Geneva-Madurai-Paris-Quezon
City, September 15, 2016 – Our organisations condemn the arbitrary travel ban
imposed on Kashmiri human rights defender Mr. Khurram Parvez, who was prohibited
from leaving India as he was about to travel to Geneva, Switzerland to
participate in the 33rd session of the United Nations' Human Rights
Council (UNHRC). 
 
At 1:30 a.m. on September 14, 2016, Mr. Khurram
Parvez was stopped by immigration officials at the Indira Gandhi International
airport in Delhi and prevented from leaving the country to attend the current
UNHRC session. Mr. Parvez was detained for one and a half hours at the airport,
and subsequently told that the Intelligence Bureau of India had ordered that he
was not allowed to travel, despite having an invitation letter and a valid visa
to travel to Geneva. Mr. Parvez repeatedly asked for an explanation for why he
was being denied the right to travel and asked to see written proof of the
orders from the Intelligence Bureau, but the authorities refused to provide him
with either. Immigration officers simply told Mr. Parvez that they had
instructions that he was not to be ‘arrested’ but that he should not be allowed
to leave the country. 
 
Mr. Parvez is the Chairperson of the
Asian Federation Against Involuntary Disappearances (AFAD) and Program
Coordinator of the Jammu Kashmir Coalition of Civil Society (JKCCS). He was
slated to be part of the AFAD & JKCCS delegation visiting Geneva from 14th
to 24th September to attend the UNHRC session. While in Geneva, the Kashmiri
members of the delegation are scheduled to brief UN bodies including the UN
High Commissioner for Human Rights regarding the concerning situation in Jammu
and Kashmir. 
 
In his work with AFAD and JKCCS, Mr.
Parvez has consistently highlighted violations of human rights taking place in
India, notably in Jammu and Kashmir. In addition to their planned advocacy work
at the current UNHRC session, JKCCS has also recently submitted a report to the
UN on the role of the Indian authorities in gross human rights violations
taking place in Jammu and Kashmir. 
 
By denying Mr. Parvez the right to
travel to Geneva to participate at the UNHRC session, the Indian Government is
disregarding its obligation to uphold international human rights principles,
notably the right of civil society members to be represented and engage with UN
mechanisms, as enshrined in the 1998 UN Declaration of human rights defenders
and several resolutions adopted by the UN General Assembly.[1]

 
It is especially concerning that India
is engaging in such repression in the wake of a statement made yesterday by the
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, wherein he expressed regret at India’s
lack of cooperation with international human rights mechanisms, particularly
with respect to Kashmir. The Government of India continues to out-rightly
refuse to give the UN permission to conduct a fact-finding mission in Kashmir,
despite widespread accusations of serious human rights violations by security
personnel in the region.[2]
 
The travel ban imposed on Khurram Parvez
is the latest attempt by the Indian Government to censor the human rights
situation in Kashmir and to isolate the Kashmiri people, notably human rights
defenders working on this important issue. Especially given that India is
presently a member of the UN Human Rights Council, the international community
cannot stay silent in the face of such disregard of its human rights
obligations. 
 
Our organisations condemn the travel ban
against Mr. Parvez, and call on the Indian authorities to respect his personal
liberty, his right to travel freely, notably to participate in meetings at the
UN. Additionally, we demand an end to the harassment of human rights defenders
and that the Indian government remove all legal and administrative barriers
that impede their legitimate work on human rights. We also call on the
international community, notably the other members of the UN Human Rights
Council, to insist that India comply with its human rights obligations,
including by allowing Indian human rights defenders to freely engage in their work,
and by fully cooperating with the UN requests for access to Kashmir and
elsewhere in the country.
 
***
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (The Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The objective of this programme is
to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
The Asian Federation Against
Involuntary Disappearances (AFAD) is a federation of
human rights organizations working directly on the issue of involuntary
disappearances in Asia. Envisioning a world without desaparecidos, AFAD was
founded on June 4, 1998 in Manila, Philippines.
 
The Asian Human Rights Commission
(AHRC) works
towards the radical rethinking and fundamental redesigning of justice
institutions in order to protect and promote human rights in Asia. Established
in 1984, the Hong Kong based organisation is a Laureate of the Right Livelihood
Award 2014.
 
FORUM-ASIA is a regional human rights group with 58
member organisations in 19 countries across Asia. FORUM-ASIA addresses key
areas of human rights violations in the region, including freedoms of
expression, assembly and association, human rights defenders, and
democratisation. FORUM-ASIA operates through its offices in Bangkok, Jakarta,
Geneva and Kathmandu. 
 
Human Rights Defenders Alert – India
(HRDA) is a
national network of human rights defenders for human rights defenders.  HRDA intervenes in the cases of
threats/harassment/attack on HRDs and curbing of freedom of expression,
assembly and association.
 
The International Coalition Against
Enforced Disappearances (ICAED) is a network of 42
member organisations concerned with the issue of human rights and the struggle
against enforced disappearances. The principal objective of ICAED is maximising
impact of the activities carried out by its members in favour of an early
ratification and effective implementation of the Convention for the Protection
of all Persons from Enforced Disappearances. 
 
Odhikar, a human rights organisation
based in Dhaka, Bangladesh, was founded in 1994 with the aim to create a wider
monitoring and awareness raising system on the abuse of civil and political
rights. 
 
For more information, please contact:
·      
AFAD: Mary Aileen D.
Bacalso: +63 2 456 6434 
·      
AHRC: Md. Ashrafuzzaman:
+41 766 382 659 / +852 607 32 807
·      
FIDH: Arthur Manet / Audrey
Couprie: + 33143552518
·      
FORUM-ASIA: Anjuman Ara
Begum: +977 982 381 5517
·      
HRDA: Mathew Jacob:  +91 886 011 0520
·      
ICAED: Mary Aileen D.
Bacalso: +63 917 792 4058
·      
Odhikar: Adilur Rahman
Khan: + 880 29 88 85 87
·      
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau:
+41 22 809 49 34



[1]       UN
General Assembly Resolution A/RES/53/144 (8 March 1999) and UN General Assembly
Resolution A/C.3/70/L.46/Rev.1 (18 November 2015).


[2]       For
more information on recent violence in Kashmir and the denial of UN access, see
People’s Watch and FIDH joint press release from 18 August 2016 :
https://www.fidh.org/en/region/asia/india/kashmir-un-observers-denied-access-to-investigate-ongoing-human 