Russian Federation:  The Russian Federation : release of Mr. Imran Ezhiev
March 19, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2003 / MarchRussian Federation: The Russian Federation : release of Mr. Imran EzhievURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY  New information RUS 001 / 0303 / OBS 012.1  Release The Russian Federation 19th March 2003   The Observatory for the protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint  program of FIDH and OMCT has been informed of the release of Mr.  Imran Ezhiev, head of the Russian-Chechen Friendship Society's  Information Centre in the Northern Caucasus and regional coordinator  of the Moscow Helsinki Group. Mr. Ezhiev had been kidnapped on March  15th 2003 by unknown armed masked persons on the road between the  settlement of Shali and the village of Serzhen-Yurt  M. Ezhiev was found on 19th March 2003, at around 5:00 am, in a field  near the village of Berkat Yurt in Chechnya. According to the  information received, Mr. Ezhiev was beaten.  The Observatory would like to thank all the persons and organisations  who intervened in favour of Mr. Ezhiev.  The Observatory remains concerns by the fact that the access to  Chechnya is almost prohibited for humanitarian organizations,  journalists and international NGOs and that the few local human  rights organizations that are still trying to operate in Chechnya are  confronted daily with pressures and very precarious conditions of  work.   Background information:  M. Ezhiev was kidnapped on 15th March around 7 pm (local time) on the  road between the settlement of Shali and the village of Serzhen-Yurt.  He was accompanied by Mr. Zaur Saitovich Kharipov, a correspondent  for the SRCF, who reported that two other cars forced Mr. Ezhiev's  car to stop on the side of the road. Unidentified armed masked  persons got out of the cars and asked Mr. Ezhiev and Mr. Kharipov to  show their identity documents. They then threatened Mr. Kharipov with  their weapons and forced Mr. Ezhiev into one of the cars and drove  away to an unknown location   The kidnapping was allegedly related to the activities conducted by  Mr. Ezhiev in the Shali district, notably the gathering of  information for the annual SRCF report on human rights in Chechnya.  He was indeed constantly in contact by telephone with the Center to  denounce violations in the region. Moreover, Mr. Ezhiev was also  conducting research for OMCT on violations of economic, social and  cultural rights in Chechnya, that was to be presented at the 31st  session of the United Nations Committee on Economic, Social and  Cultural Rights in November 2003.   M. Imran Ezhiev had already been arrested by the Russian armed forces  in 2000 and 2001, although no charges had been brought against him.    Paris - Geneva, 19th March 2003  The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the  protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete  support in their time of need.  The Observatory was the winner of the 1998 Human Rights Prize of the  French Republic.  To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: Tel and fax: FIDH : +33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11 / 43 55 18 80 Tel and fax  OMCT : (+ 41 22) 809 49 39 / 809 49 29 E-mail : observatoire@iprolink.ch 