Philippines: Minimum age of criminal responsibility must not be lowered
January 22, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / 2019 / JanuaryPhilippines: Minimum age of criminal responsibility must not be lowered​
Open Letter to Hon. Gloria
Macapagal Arroyo, Speaker of the House of Representatives of the
Philippines
Via fax: (632)
932-0535
Geneva,
22 January 2019
Re: Minimum age of criminal
responsibility must not be lowered

Dear Hon. Gloria Macapagal
Arroyo,
The World
Organization Against Torture (OMCT), the leading global network of civil
society organizations against torture, summary executions, enforced
disappearances and all other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment in the world, is writing to you to seek your support in implementing
your international human rights obligations, including your pledge made on 1er
October 2018 in the context of the United Nations Human Rights Council “to
continue to be a voice for vulnerable people, including (…) children (…) and
support human rights based approaches that addresses their concerns in a comprehensive,
positive and practical way”.
The OMCT is
gravely concerned about the draft Bill tabled which seeks to lower the Minimum
Age of Criminal Responsibility for approval by the House of Representatives.
International
human rights bodies have repeatedly encouraged the Philippines to not lower the
minimum age of criminal responsibility currently set at 15 years old. The
United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child specifically urged the
Philippines to “take all necessary measures to ensure that the age of criminal
responsibility is not lowered”.[1]
Commenting on
the previous draft Bill No. 922, rejected early 2017, which sought to lower the
minimum age of criminal responsibility to nine years, the United Nations Committee against Torture recommended that “the age of criminal
responsibility be maintained at the age of 15 years.”[2]
There is ample evidence showing that early contact with the justice
system and detention of children, especially young children, leads to serious
and life-long negative impacts on their mental, emotional and physical health
and development. 
Lowering the minimum age of criminal responsibility will not reduce
crime. On the contrary, research show that children in contact with the law
have a higher chance of further involvement with the justice system. In addition, it is often the most
disadvantaged and vulnerable children who come in contact with the justice
system at a very young age. For instance, in 2018, the monitoring of holding
centers of Caloocan City by the OMCT and partners showed that around 20% of
children are detained because they have been rescued from the street or abusive
parents. Another 30% are accused of only committing minor offences.[3] 
The approval of the proposed bill would also
worsen the seriously overcrowded detention facilities throughout the
Philippines, conditions which frequently amount to torture or cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment.[4] 
During prison visits,
the OMCT and its partners have documented several incidents of corporal
punishment of children while being apprehended and detained. This included
physical and verbal abuse by staff as well as solitary confinement in small
windowless cells. Visits also revealed poor sanitary installations, lack of
medical services, lack of food and inadequate recreational activities.[5]
Accordingly, the World Organization Against Torture respectfully urges
the Congress of the Philippines to:
Immediately withdraw the current draft Bill under consideration with the
view to maintaining the minimum age of criminal responsibility at 15 years old.To ensure that deprivation of
liberty is only used as a measure of last resort, as recommended by the United
Nations Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment. To “Expand the use of alternative
measures to deprivation of liberty, such as diversion, probation and
counselling and community services”, as recommended by the United Nations
Committee on the Rights of the Child.To ensure that the fundamental
rights of children in detention are respected in accordance with the United
Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the
Child. 
In the hope that the
concerns expressed in this letter will receive the attention they deserve, we
remain at your disposal for any further information. 
Yours sincerely, 
Gerald Staberock
Secretary General



[1] CRC/C/PHL/CO/3-4.


[2] CAT/C/PHL/CO/3.


[3] OMCT, CLRDC and
PAHRA’s Follow-up Report to the Concluding Observations of the Committee
against Torture on the Philippines’ Third Periodic Report.


[4] According
to official figures from the Commission of Audit the overcrowding of prisons
has reached over 600 %.


[5] OMCT, CLRDC and PAHRA’s
Follow-up Report to the Concluding Observations of the Committee against
Torture on the Philippines’ Third Periodic Report. 