Iran:  Trade unionist Reza Shahabi sentenced to six years of prison
April 19, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2012 / AprilIran: Trade unionist Reza Shahabi sentenced to six years of prison 

THE OBSERVATORY - 
PRESS RELEASE
 
IRAN: Trade unionist Reza Shahabi sentenced to six years of 
prison 
 
Paris-Geneva, April 19, 2012. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), expresses its deepest concern about the 
sentencing of trade unionist Reza Shahabi to six-year 
imprisonment.
 
On 
April 14, 2012, the lawyer of Mr. Reza Shahabi, 
Treasurer and board member of the Syndicate of Workers of Tehran and Suburbs Bus 
Company (Sherkat-e Vahed), 
was informed that his client had been sentenced to six years in prison by Judge 
Abolghassem Salavati of Branch 15 of the Islamic Revolution Court. Mr. 
Shahabi was convicted under charges of “propaganda against the regime” (one-year 
imprisonment) and “conspiracy against the national security” (five-year 
imprisonment). He was also banned from engaging in union activities for five 
years. Furthermore, he was condemned to a 70 million-rial fine (at the time of 
publication about 3,000 euros). While Mr. Shahabi has now 
20 days to appeal, he remains detained in Evin prison.
 
Although 
Mr. Shahabi’s state of health has been deteriorating in custody, prison 
authorities have not granted him appropriate medical treatment. 
In November, he was transferred to hospital due to pains in his back and neck, 
and doctors told him that some of the vertebra in his neck have degenerated and 
are in need of surgery followed by six months of complete rest, and that without 
hospitalisation his left side might be paralysed. On January 31, 2012, he was 
transferred to hospital for surgery, but was returned to prison later without an 
operation, because of the high risks. Apparently the doctors believe he must 
take complete rest for a few months to be ready for an operation. Beside his 
neck, his back is now also in bad conditions and he may need a disc operation as 
well. The damages to his spinal cord and back are believed to be caused by heavy 
beating in Evin prison’s section 209 of Ministry of Intelligence after his 
arrest.
 
On 
April 14, Mr. Reza Shahabi started a dry hunger strike in protest to 
deteriorating conditions of his health and his prison sentence, demanding 
hospitalisation and abolition of the sentence. The Observatory recalls that Mr. 
Shahabi has been in pre-trial detention for over 22 months since his arrest on 
June 12, 2010 before being tried on February 28, 2012.
 
The 
Observatory further recalls that in Iran, the authorities continue to target 
independent trade unionists and subject them to judicial harassment and unfair 
prison sentences as an attempt to reduce the number of those who are prepared to 
defend workers' rights. At present, there are several independent unionists in 
prison, among them, Messrs. Ali Nejati, Shahrokh 
Zamani, Mohammad Jarrahi, Sassan 
Vahebivash, Behnam Ebrahimzadeh, Rassoul 
Bodaghi, Mohammad Hosseini, Mehdi Farahi 
Shandiz, Farzad Ahmadi, Mehrdad 
Amir-Vaziri, Pedram Nasrollahi and Ali 
Akhavan.
 
On 
a positive note, the Observatory welcomes the release on April 18, 2012 of Mr. 
Ebrahim 
Madadi, 
Vice-President of Sherkat-e Vahed Workers Syndicate, after serving a three and a 
half-year imprisonment sentence, which was issued against him in December 
2008.
 
“Many 
trade unionists are subjected to an ongoing harassment, particularly at the 
judicial level, in Iran for defending human rights”, 
said Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH President. They 
are either arbitrarily detained or at risk of imminent arrest. These arbitrary 
prosecutions merely aim at silencing workers' rights defenders amid the current 
general crackdown on the Iranian civil society”. 

 
“The 
Observatory strongly denounces the sentencing of Mr. Shahabi and calls on the 
Iranian authorities to put an end to all acts of harassment against human rights 
defenders, to immediately and unconditionally release those presently detained 
in the country, to take all necessary measures to guarantee, in all 
circumstances, their physical and psychological integrity, and 
more generally to conform to the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and international human 
rights instruments ratified by Iran”, 
added Mr. Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General.
 
For 
further information, please contact:
FIDH: 
Karine Appy / Arthur Manet : + 33 1 43 55 25 18OMCT: 
Delphine Reculeau : + 41 22 809 49 39 