Saudi Arabia:  Arrest and ongoing arbitrary detention of nine human rights defenders
May 24, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Saudi Arabia / 2018 / MaySaudi Arabia: Arrest and ongoing arbitrary detention of nine human rights defenders​SAU
003 / 0518 / OBS 073Arbitrary
detention / Release
Judicial
harassment 
Saudi
Arabia
May
24, 2018
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Saudi Arabia.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by ALQST about the arrest and ongoing
arbitrary detention of human rights defenders Ms. Eman al-Nafjan, Ms. Aziza
al-Youssef, Ms. Loujain al-Hathloul, Ms. Madiha al-Ajroush,
Ms. Hessah Al-Sheikh, Ms. Walaa Al-Shubbar, Mr. Mohammed
al-Rabiah, and Mr. Ibrahim al-Mudaimeegh as well as of the arbitrary
arrest, detention and subsequent release of Ms. Aisha al-Mana.
 
According to the information received, on May 15, 2018 at 2pm, Saudi
police forces raided the home of Ms. Loujain al-Hathloul, arrested her in her
bedroom and transferred her to Al-Ha'ir prison, and then to Dahban prison in
Jeddah. As of issuing this Urgent Appeal, she would still be detained in Dahban
prison, although nobody has been able to contact her since her arrest. In
November 2014, Saudi authorities had previously arrested Ms. al-Hathloul after
she drove herself from Abu Dhabi to the Saudi border. She was held at a
juvenile detention centre for 73 days before being released in February 2015.
The authorities detained her again in June 2017 when she arrived at Dammam
airport but released her after several days.
 
On the same day, women's rights activist and psychoanalyst Madiha
al-Ajroush was also arrested. Through her clinical practice, Ms. al-Ajroush has
offered help and psychotherapy to several victims of domestic violence as well
as refugee children in camps in Lebanon and Jordan.
 
Within the same context, the authorities arrested prominent women’s
rights activist Aziza al-Youssef, from her home. She was one of the first to
call for women to be allowed to drive, and has been notably active in defending
women’s rights, workers’ rights and civil and political rights. She tried to
set up a refuge for battered women and girls who are not accepted back from
government social care institutions by their families, but the authorities
turned down her application. Pressure had mounted on Ms. al-Youssef over the
past year, and she was increasingly called in for questioning. The authorities
prevented her from commenting on the Royal Decree allowing women to drive –
which she, together with other women’s rights activists, had brought about.
 
The wave of arrest of May 15, 2018 also targeted well-known blogger and
activist Ms. Eman al-Nafjan, a leading campaigner for women’s rights and human
rights in general.
 
On the same day, the authorities arrested Ms. Aisha al-Mana, Dean of Al
Mana College and one of Saudi Arabia’s earliest feminists. She took part in the
1990 campaign against the ban on women driving, in which she and some other women
drove their cars, and wrote a book on the topic, entitled The Sixth of
November. She was previously imprisoned and threatened by the authorities. Ms.
Aisha al-Mana was released on May 23, 2018.
 
Two other women's rights defenders, Ms. Hessah Al-Sheikh, one of the
leading campaigners of the right of women to drive, and Ms. Walaa Al-Shubbar, a
defender of victims of domestic violence as well as campaigner against the male
guardianship system, were also arrested on the same day, together with Mr.
Mohammed al-Rabiah, an active supporter of women’s right to drive.
 
Authorities also proceeded on May 15, 2018, to the arrest of Mr. Ibrahim
al-Mudaimeegh, a former member of the Saudi Council of Ministers’ Commission of
Experts and Saudi Arabia’s most prominent lawyer. Mr. al-Mudaimeegh has handled
pro bono defence in some of the most sensitive cases in the country, and took
on the cases of several members of the Saudi Civil and Political Rights
Association (ACPRA). He defended human rights activists Ms. Al-Hathloul and
Messrs. Waleed Abu al-Khair, Mohamed al-Oteibi, Abdullah
al-Atawi, Essam Koshak, Essa al-Nukhaifi and many other
prisoners of conscience. He has also spoke out against Israeli crimes toward
the Palestinian people and on other human rights issues, which led authorities
to force him to close down his Twitter
account in November 2017. On May 5, 2018, Mr. Ibrahim al-Mudaimeegh went to the
airport on his way to get medical treatment abroad but found himself
unexpectedly prevented from travelling, and when he tried to ascertain the
reason for the travel ban he was met with personal abuse and threatened with
arrest for asking why he had been banned from travelling. He continued to be
harassed and threatened until being arrested on May 15, 2018.
 
As of issuing this Urgent Appeal, Ms. Aziza al-Youssef,
Ms. Loujain al-Hathloul, Ms. Aisha al-Mana, Ms. Madiha al-Ajroush, Ms. Hessah
Al-Sheikh, Ms. Walaa Al-Shubbar, Mr. Mohammed al-Rabiah and Mr. Ibrahim
al-Mudaimeegh are reported to be detained in Dahban prison in
Jeddah, under vague accusations of “suspicious contacts with foreign entities”
and “financial support to enemies overseas”, which were relayed in
pro-governmental media outlets. Yet no formal charges were reportedly pressed
against them.
 
The Observatory expresses its utmost concern
over this wave of above-mentioned arrests and arbitrary detentions, which only
seems to aim at sanctioning peaceful and legitimate human rights activities,
and fears that the authorities intend to stifle the main dissenting voices
ahead of the entry into force on June 24, 2018 of the Royal Decree that will
allow women to drive. 
 
The Observatory urges Saudi authorities to
release the above-mentioned human rights defenders
immediately and unconditionally, and to put
an end to all acts of harassment against them as well as all human rights
defenders in Saudi Arabia. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Saudi Arabia asking
them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of Ms. Eman al-Nafjan, Ms. Aziza al-Youssef, Ms. Loujain
al-Hathloul, Ms. Aisha al-Mana, Ms. Madiha al-Ajroush, Ms. Hessah Al-Sheikh,
Ms. Walaa Al-Shubbar, Mr. Mohammed al-Rabiah, and Mr. Ibrahim al-Mudaimeegh as
well as all human rights defenders in Saudi Arabia;
 
ii. Immediately and unconditionally release Ms. Eman
al-Nafjan, Ms. Aziza al-Youssef, Ms. Loujain al-Hathloul, Ms. Madiha
al-Ajroush, Ms. Hessah Al-Sheikh, Ms. Walaa Al-Shubbar, Mr. Mohammed al-Rabiah,
and Mr. Ibrahim al-Mudaimeegh, as
well as all detained human rights defenders in Saudi Arabia, as their
detention is arbitrary since it only aims at punishing them for their
legitimate human rights activities;
 
iii. Put an end to all forms of harassment,
including at the judicial level, against Ms. Eman al-Nafjan, Ms. Aziza
al-Youssef, Ms. Loujain al-Hathloul, Ms. Aisha al-Mana, Ms. Madiha al-Ajroush,
Ms. Hessah Al-Sheikh, Ms. Walaa Al-Shubbar, Mr. Mohammed al-Rabiah, and Mr.
Ibrahim al-Mudaimeegh and all human
rights defenders in the country so they are able to carry out their work
without unjustified hindrance and fear of reprisal;
 
iv. Comply in all circumstances with all
the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in
particular its Articles 1, 6(c) and 12.2;
 
v. More generally, ensure in all
circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and instruments.
 
Addresses:
 
i.    
His Majesty, King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, King of Saudi Arabia and
Custodian of the two Holy Mosques, Fax: (via Ministry of the Interior) +966 11
403 3125; Email: info@moi.gov.sa; Twitter:
@KingSalman
ii.  
His Excellency, Mohammad Bin Salman Al Saud, Crown Prince of Saudi
Arabia, Fax: (via Ministry of the Interior) +966 11 403 3125; Email: info@moi.gov.sa
iii. 
H.E. Waleed bin Mohammad Al Samaani, Minister of Justice, Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, Fax: + 966 11 405 7777; Email: info@moj.gov.sa
iv.  His Royal Highness Prince Abdulaziz Bin
Saud Bin Naif Bin Abdulaziz, Minister of Interior, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
Fax: + 966 11 401 1111 / + 966 11 401 1944 / + 966 11 403 1125; Email: info@moi.gov.sa
v.   H.E. Adel bin Ahmed El Jubeir, Minister of
Foreign Affairs, Fax: + 966 11 403 0645 ; Email: info@mofa.gov.sa
vi.  H.E. Abdulaziz Alwasil, Ambassador,
Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to the United Nations Office
in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 758 00 00. Email: saudiamission@bluewin.ch
vii.
H.E. Abdulrahman bin Soliman Al-Ahmed, Ambassador, Embassy of Saudi
Arabia in Brussels, Belgium. Fax: +32 2 6468538. Email: beemb@mofa.gov.sa
 
Please also write to the diplomatic representations of
Saudi Arabia in your respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, May 24, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is
dedicated to the protection of human rights defenders and aims to offer them
concrete support in their time of need. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
·       E-mail:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org

·       Tel and fax FIDH: +33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / 01 43 55 18
80
·      
Tel and fax OMCT: + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29 