Philippines:  Fear of forced disappearance
February  5, 2008
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2008 / FebruaryPhilippines: Fear of forced disappearanceCase PHL 050208 Fear of forced disappearance/ Fear for safety  The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the Philippines. Brief description of the situation The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture network, about the possible disappearance of Mr. Eliseo Berot, 20-years-old resident of Barangay Dungu-an, Danao City, whose whereabouts are unclear. According to the information received, on 23 January 2008, at around 8:00 p.m., Mr. Eliseo Berot was arrested by Lt. Michael Madayag and his team, belonging to the 78th Infantry Division based in Tuburan under Lt. Col. Jeffrey Omandam commander, for allegedly acting suspiciously. The militaries were reportedly patrolling the mountain barangays in Danao City when they spotted Mr. Eliseo Berot. They then reportedly apprehended and searched him. They reportedly found a 45 caliber in his possession and bullets magazine. According to the information received, Mr. Eliseo Berot was probed by the military to find out if he was a member of the New People’s Army (NPA). The victim reportedly denied. The military reportedly continued to believe he was one although no subversive documents were found in his possession. According to the same information received, TFDP staff went to Danao City to find if the military had turned Mr. Eliseo Berot over to the police. However, while the police allowed the staff to look into their record book (at the Bureau of Jail Management and Penology (BJMP), Danao City and the Philippines National Police Station, Danao City), it could not find the name of Mr. Eliseo Berot. The police reportedly explained that he may be turned over to them when the military would have filed a case against him. At the time of issuing the appeal, the exact whereabouts of Mr. Eliseo Berot remain unclear. The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Eliseo Berot, as his whereabouts remain unknown, giving rise to fears that he may be subjected to ill-treatment, torture or potentially extra-judicial execution. OMCT calls on the authorities to immediately locate his whereabouts and guarantee his personal integrity at all times. Action requested Please right to the authorities in the Philippines urging them to:   Immediately locate Mr. Eliseo Berot’s whereabouts;  Take all measures necessary to guarantee his physical and psychological integrity;  Order his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times;  Order a thorough and impartial investigation into these events, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  Guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President, Republic of the Philippines New Executive Bldg. Malacañang Palace Compound J. P. Laurel St. San Miguel, Manila, Philippines E-mail: opnet@ops.gov.ph, kgma@yahoogroups.com Fax: (+63) 2 929 3968 The National Defense Secretary Rm. 301 DND Bldg. Camp Aguinaldo, EDSA, 1110 Quezon City Philippines, E-mail: snd@dnd.gov.ph/osnd@philonline.com, Fax: +63 2724 8763 PNP Chief Jacinto Cesar, City Police Chief, PNP HQ, Tagbilaran City Gen. Hermogenes Esperon, Jr, Armed Forces Chief of Staff, AFP GHQ, Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Edsa, Quezon City Gen. Oscar Calderon, PNP Chief, Camp Crame, Edsa, Quezon City, Fax No. 063 2 724 8763, Tel: +63 2911 6213 Hon. Dr. Purificacion Quisumbing, Chairperson, Commission on Human Rights, SAAC Building, Commonwealth Ave., UP Complex, Quezon City, Email address: drpvq@chr.gov.ph Bienvinido C. Blancaflor, Director, Fact-finding Investigation, Corruption, Prevention and Public Assistance Bureau, Office of the Deputy Ombudsman for the Military and Other Law Enforcement Offices, 3rd Flr. Ombudsman Bldg, Agham Rd Diliman (1104) Quezon City Tel. +632 926 9032 Office of the Presidential Adviser on Peace Process (OPAPP), Hon. Jesus Dureza, 10th Flr, Agustin 1 Bldg, Emerald Avenue, Ortigas Center Lt. Col. Jeffrey Umandam, Commander, 78th Infantry Division, Philippine Army HQ, Tuburan, Cebu, Attn. to: 1Lt Michael Madayag, 78th Infantry Battalion HQ, Danao, Cebu Permanent Mission of the Philippines to the United Nations in Geneva, 47 Avenue Blanc, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 716 19 32, Email: mission.philippines@ties.itu.int Embassy of the Philippines in Brussels, 297 Avenue Moliere, 1050 Brussels, Belgium, Tel: +32 2 340 33 77 / 2 340 33 78, Fax: +32 2 345 64 25.  Please also write to the embassies of the Philippines in your respective country. Geneva, 05 February 2008 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 