Nepal:  Political interference in police investigation_Risk of impunity in the case of journalist Dekendra Raj Thapa
January 14, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2013 / JanuaryNepal: Political interference in police investigation_Risk of impunity in the case of journalist Dekendra Raj Thapa
NPL 140113
Denial of justice/ Political interference
in police investigation/ Risk of impunity
 
The International
Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT
intervention in the following situation in Nepal.
Brief description
of the situation
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by Advocacy Forum (AF), a
member organisation of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the recent political interference
in a police investigation carried out into the abduction, torture and killing of
Mr. Dekendra Raj Thapa, a
journalist affiliated to Radio Nepal, Nepal Red Cross Society, Dailekh, Amnesty
International, and the President of Drinking Water User Committee, in August
2004. OMCT is gravely concerned about the order of the Prime Minister of Nepal
to halt investigations into the case.
According to the
information received, on 26 June 2004, cadres of the ten Communist Party of Nepal (Maoists) abducted Mr. Dekendra Raj
Thapa and a friend in Naumule, Dailehk district. His wife searched for him and
reported his abduction to the police and human rights organisations. However,
she was unable to locate his whereabouts. One week after the abduction, the
friend, who had been arrested alongside with Mr. Dekendra Raj Thapa, was
released and informed Mr. Dekendra Raj Thapa’s wife that her husband would be
released within that week. However, Mr. Dekendra Raj Thapa did not get
released. Mr. Dekendra Raj Thapa’s wife later learnt that he had been forced to
walk for a whole day and was kept in a school, where he was interrogated and
tortured by Maoists cadres. Due to the torture, he reportedly fell unconscious
and was buried nearby the jungle while he was still breathing on 11 August
2004. A few days later, on 16 August 2004, Mr. Dekendra Raj Thapa’s wife found
a statement, signed by Ranjeet, district Secretary of the Maoist Party, stating
that Mr. Dekendra Raj Thapa had been “wiped out” after he had been charged
under ten accusations, including spying on the Maoists.
On 26 June 2008,
Mr. Dekendra Raj Thapa’s body was exhumed with the technical assistance
provided by the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC), Nepalgunj. On 28
August 2008, his wife filed a First Information Report (FIR) at the District
Police Office, Dailekh District, on his abduction and murder, listing eight
Maoists cadres as perpetrators, namely Laxiram Gharti, Harilal Pun Magar,
Birbahadur KC, Nirak Bahadur Gharti Magar, Jaya Bahadur Shahi, Chabi Lal Shahi
(Ranjeet), Bam Bahadur Khadka and another Maoist cadre. However, the police did
not start any investigation arguing either that the case would be carried out
once the transitional justice mechanisms would be in place or that the
suspected perpetrators were absconding although villagers claimed that they
were walking freely in the area.
On 5 January
2013, the police eventually arrested five alleged perpetrators, only after Mr. Dekendra
Raj Thapa’s wife submitted a writ petition, with the legal assistance of
Advocacy Forum, on 12 December 2012 before the Appellate Court, Surkhet, asking
the Court to order the police to carry out a prompt investigation. The police
first arrested Mr. Laxiram Gharti, one of the alleged perpetrators, and based
on the information he provided, managed to arrest four other alleged
perpetrators on the same day. The three other remain reportedly absconding.
Nevertheless,
according to the same information received, on 8 January 2013, the Prime
Minister of Nepal, Dr. Baburam Bhattarai, ordered the police and the District
Attorney Office, Dailekh, to immediately halt all investigations into the case.
Investigation officers have since reportedly admitted that they have been under
pressure from higher authorities to stop taking statements from the accused. OMCT
has also been informed that one of the alleged perpetrators has been nominated
to be integrated in Nepal Army.
OMCT is concerned
that the Unified Communist Party of Nepal (UCPN) (Maoist) led government is
trying to protect the then party cadres from investigation and prosecution into
the killing of Mr. Dekendra Raj Thapa.
OMCT recalls
that, due mostly to the continued political instability, there has been no move
ahead on establishing accountability for human rights violations committed
during the decade-long (1996-2006) internal conflict between Government forces
and Maoist rebels. Despite the provisions of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
of 2006, little progress has been made in connection to the establishment of
transitional justice mechanisms and not a single individual has been
successfully prosecuted by civilian courts for a conflict-related case, which has
also contributed to the prevailing impunity with regard to violations committed
since the end of the conflict.
OMCT recalls that
the Nepalese authorities have to fulfil their obligations under international
human rights law to bringing to justice those responsible for committing human
rights violations and to providing justice for victims.
Therefore, OMCT
urges the competent authorities to carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial
investigation into the aforementioned facts, in accordance with
international human rights standards, the result of which must be made public,
in order to bring those responsible before a competent, independent and
impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as
provided by law.
Action requested
Please write to
the authorities in Nepal urging them to:
 
i.              
Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and
psychological integrity of Mr. Dekendra Raj Thapa’s family, the lawyers working on the case and the witnesses to the case;

ii.             
Carry out a prompt,
effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the aforementioned
facts, in accordance with international human rights standards, the result of which must
be made public, in orderto bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial
tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by
law;
iii.           
End any political interference with the
investigation; 
iv.           
Ensure that adequate,
effective and prompt reparation, including adequate compensation, is granted to
Mr. Dekendra Raj Thapa’s family;
v.             
Ensure the respect of human rights and fundamental
freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and
international human rights standards.
 
Addresses
 
Ø Prime Minister, Dr. Baburam Bhattarai, Office of the
Prime Minister and Council of Nepal, Singha Darbar, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: +
977-1-4211286, Email: info@opmcm.gov.np 
Ø Inspector General of Police, Mr. Kuber Singh Rana,
Police Head Quarters, Naxal, Kathmandu, Nepal, PO. Box No.: 407, Fax: + 977 1 4
415 593, Email: info@nepalpolice.gov.np
Ø Attorney General, Mr. Mukti Nath Pradhan, Office of
Attorney General Ramshahpath, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: + 977 1 4262582, Email: attorney@mos.com.np,    info@attorneygeneral@gov.np , socialjus@gmail.com 
Ø Chairman of the National Human Rights Commission, Mr.
Kedar Nath Uppadhya, Pulchowck, Lalitpur, Nepal; Email: nhrc@nhrcnepal.org ; complaints@nhrcnepal.org  Fax: + 977 1 5547973
Ø Permanent
Mission of Nepal, 81 rue de la Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: + 4122 7332722, E-mail: mission.nepal@bluewin.ch 
 
Please also write
to the embassies of Nepal in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 14 January
2013
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your r 