Iran:  Lawyer Soltani sentenced to 13 years imprisonment in exile on appeal
June 14, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2012 / JuneIran: Lawyer Soltani sentenced to 13 years imprisonment in exile on appeal

THE
OBSERVATORY - PRESS RELEASE

 
IRAN: Prominent human rights lawyer sentenced to 13 years
imprisonment in exile on appeal
 
Paris-Geneva,
June 13, 2012. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), denounces the unfair
sentence on appeal of Mr. Abdolfattah Soltani to 13 years in prison in exile in
the remote city of Borazjan (southern Bushehr province). 
 
The relatives of Mr. Abdolfattah Soltani, lawyer and founding member of Defenders of Human Rights Centre (DHRC), were informed a few days ago that the Appeals Court of Tehran Province had condemned Mr. Soltani to 13 years in prison in “internal exile” in the remote city
of Borazjan (southern Bushehr province). This imprisonment in exile is contrary
to Iranian laws as the latter do not provide for this type of sentence. The
laws provide either for “imprisonment” or for “exile” in another part of the
country. In addition, the exile to Borazjan prison will
make family visits extremely difficult, as Mr. Soltanis’ relatives will have to
travel 800 km back and forth every time for a short visit. The Iranian
judiciary is thus de facto also punishing Mr. Soltani’s family.
 
It is to be recalled that in March 
2012, Mr. Soltani was condemned in
the first instance to 18 years imprisonment in exile on charges of “propaganda against the system”, “participation in founding the Human Rights Defenders Centre”, “assembly and collusion against national security”, as well as “earning illegitimate assets”
as a laureate of the Nuremberg City Human Rights prize in 2009.
 
Prior to the issuing of the sentence
on appeal, interrogators of the Ministry of Intelligence had reportedly
pressured Mr. Soltani into incriminating himself and the DHRC in exchange for
leniency, including the cancellation of the sentence of internal exile, which
he refused. 
 
The Observatory recalls that Mr. Soltani has been subjected to judicial harassment for many years but the harassment increased following the
contested June 2009 presidential election. Several other DHRC members have also
faced an intense criminalisation campaign since the closure of the DHRC in
December 2008. These include Mohammad Seifzadeh, Ms.
Nargess Mohammadi and Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh, who are serving prison sentences of 2, 6 and 6 years
respectively, Mr. Mohammad Ali Dadkhah, whose 9-year prison sentence was
upheld on appeal, and Mr. Abdolreza Tajik, who was forced to leave the
country to avoid a 6-year prison sentence.
 
The Observatory believes that this new sentence against Mr. Abdolfattah Soltani merely aims at
silencing him and preventing him from carrying out
his human rights activities, especially in his capacity as a human rights lawyer. More generally, it should be seen in the context of
the general repression of all human rights activities and intimidation of
lawyers who stand up for human rights, as well as all
human rights defenders in Iran. 
 
The Observatory urges the Iranian authorities to immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Abdolfattah Soltani, put an end
to any form of judicial harassment against him and all human rights defenders detained for their human rights activities, and more generally to conform to the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and international human rights instruments ratified by Iran. 