Israel:  'Palestinian Occupied Territories: civilians killed and injured
March  7, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2001 / MarchIsrael: 'Palestinian Occupied Territories: civilians killed and injuredCase ISR 070301 and CHILD CONCERN Case ISR 070301.CC  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the Occupied territories.  Brief description of the situation:  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Palestinian Society for the Protection of Human Rights and the Environment (LAW), a member of the OMCT network, that three Palestinian civilians were killed and 5 others injured by Israeli Defence Forces (IDF) and settlers in the occupied territories.  According to information received, at 8.30 p.m. in the night of 3 March 2001, inhabitants of Hawara village saw unusual cars with Israeli number plates in their village. Some of the Palestinian youths from the village tried to block the cars and threw stones at them. It is reported that the occupants of the Israeli cars were Israeli soldiers disguised as Palestinians: otherwise known as "el Mustaribeen". The Israeli soldiers fired heavily at the Palestinian youths. As a result, Baher Shafik Mahmoud Oda (18 years old, Hawara Village) was killed by three bullets of live ammunition. He was shot once in the stomach, once in the leg, and once in the back. In the same incident, Morad Lafi Hasan (20 years old) was severly injured. Two children also suffered injuries (see Case ISR 050301.CC).  In another incident reported by LAW, a settler from Gilo settlement, at 8.30 p.m. on the same day, fired at Ahmed Hasan Hahmed Alen (18 years old from Kariot) whilst he was driving his car on his way back from Ramallah, where he works. He was shot with live ammunition in the head and died immediately. It is reported that at this time, there were no clashes or demonstrations taking place and no firing by Palestinians against the settlement.  LAW also reports that at 7.30 pm on the same night, Israeli occupying forces in the Israeli settlement of Basgot, situated in el Tawila Mountain, attacked the Friends School in El Bira using heavy weaponry. Ida Daoud Musa (43 year old woman, El Berih) was walking on the street and  was passing Friends school with her son and daughter (see Case ISR 050301.CC), when she was hit with a 5 mm live ammunition bullet. The bullet entered her chest, damaging her internal organs before it settled in her upper right leg. Another woman, Wafee Ahmed Muhammed Karan, 42 years old, was also hit in her left arm in the same incident. It is also reported that no clashes or demonstrations were taking place at the time and there was no shooting from Palestinians at the Basgot settlement when the Israeli forces attacked the school.   CHILD CONCERN Case ISR 070301.CC   The International Secretariat of OMCT has also been informed by LAW that Akram Ali Terwari (17 years old), shot by live ammunition in the shoulder, and Suleiman Abraham Ouda (16 years old) were injured together with Morad Lafi Hasan (see Case ISR 070301 above).  It is also reported by LAW that Ida Daoud Musa’s daughter, Nadil Musa (12 years old) was hit in her left arm.    Remarks:  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned by the escalation of violence in the occupied territories including the excessive use of force by Israeli Defence Forces against Palestinian civilians, and strongly condemns all acts of violence perpetrated by all actors involved in the confrontations.     Action requested:  Please write to the authorities in Israel urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned injured persons;  ii.	guarantee adequate reparation to all victims and their families;  iii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these events, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law;  iv.	respect law enforcement standards as set up notably by the 1979 United Nations Code of Conduct of Law Enforcement Officials, and the 1990 United Nations Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials;  v.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses:  Ariel Sharon, Prime Minister and Minister of Defence, Office of the Prime Minister, 3 Kaplan Street Hakirya, Jerusalem 91007, Israel, Faxes: +972 2 566 4838 and  +972 3 691 7915   Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, 29 Salah al-Din Street,  Jerusalem 91029, State of Israel.  Fax : + 972 2 6285 438   Minister of Defense, Ministry of Defense, 7 "A" Street, Hakirya,  Tel Aviv, Israel. Fax: +972 3 697 62 18.  Minister of Police, Ministry of Police, PO Box 18182, 3 Sheikh  Jarrah, Kiryat Hamemshala, Jerusalem 91181, State of Israel. Fax  : + 972 2 5826 769.  Please also write to the embassies of Israel in your respective country.  Geneva, March 7, 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 