Syrian Arab Republic:  The Syrian authorities must reveal the fate of Mazen Darwish and SCM staff
March 14, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2012 / MarchSyrian Arab Republic: The Syrian authorities must reveal the fate of Mazen Darwish and SCM staffThe Syrian authorities must reveal the fate of Mazen Darwish and SCM staff_ARABIC3 pages / 63 KB
The Syrian authorities must reveal the
fate of Mazen Darwish and SCM staff

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE                                                              March 14, 2012 

The
undersigning organizations express their grave concerns for the safety of Mr. Mazen
Darwish, Head of the Damascus based Syrian Centre for Media and Freedom of
Expression (SCM) and seven of his colleagues, arrested by Air Force
Intelligence members on February 16, 2012 during a raid on their Damascus
offices. 
According
to a trustworthy source within Syria, Mr. Darwish has been subjected to torture
and other ill-treatment during his interrogation and imprisonment at an Air Force Intelligence detention center in Damascus.
We have reasons to believe that his life is in danger, especially as Mazen
Darwish faces serious previous health issues that require medical treatment and
worsen his condition.
Mazen Darwish was arrested along with 15 other persons during the February 16 raid. Seven women detained were conditionally
released in the following 48 hours, but have to report to the detention
center every day for further interrogations. Mr.
Shady Yazbek, a visitor to the SCM arrested
along with the staff during the raid, was released on March 12, 2012. No charges
have been pressed against them so far.
Since
their detention almost a month ago, Mr. Mazen Darwish and eight other men have
been held in incommunicado detention at the Air Force Intelligence detention
center located in El Mezzeh, Damascus. They have no access to any of their
colleagues, family members or their lawyers and so far no official charges have
been pressed against them.
The undersigned organizations are gravely concerned about the fate of the
persons who remain in detention following the raid on SCM office and repeat
their call to Syrian authorities to unconditionally release those detained as
the detention is apparently related to their peaceful activities as human right
defenders, bloggers and journalists. 
Besides
Mr. Mazen Darwish, detained SCM staff members include Mr. Hani Zitani,
Mr. Abdel Rahman Hamada, Mr. Hussein Gharir, Mr. Mansour
Al-Omarei, Mr. Joan Fersso, Mr. Ayham Ghazoul and Mr. Bassam
Al-Ahmed.
The
undersigned groups have documented systematic and widespread torture by Syria’s
security services against detainees since the beginning of the unrest in the
country. According to the Violations Documentation Center, a Syrian network of
activists, at least 386 detainees died in custody since the start of the
uprising on March 15, 2011.
The
undersigned organizations reiterate that the Syrian authorities are responsible
and accountable under international law for guaranteeing the physical and
mental integrity of all detainees, including Mr. Mazen Darwish and his
colleagues. Furthermore, the Syrian authorities must put an immediate end to
arbitrary arrests and harassment of human rights defenders, including those
advocating for freedom of expression, journalists, and bloggers. The
authorities must release all persons who remain arbitrarily detained.
Alkarama
Foundation
ARTICLE 19
Cairo
Institute for Human Rights Studies
Committee to Protect Journalists 
Damascus
Center for Human Rights Studies
Euro-Mediterranean
Human Rights Network
Front
Line - International Foundation for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders
Human Rights Watch
Humanist
Institute for Development Cooperation (Hivos)
International
Commission of Jurists 
International
Media Support 
International
Press Institute
Kurdish
Committee for Human Rights
Maharat
Foundation
Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT)
Reporters Without Borders 
Syrian
Organization for Human Rights – Swasiah
Syrian
Organization for Human Rights – MAF 
 

For more information: 
Joint statement from the UN Special
Rapporteurs on human rights defenders (Margaret Sekaggya), on freedom of
expression (Frank La Rue), on torture (Juan Méndez) and the Chair-Rapporteur of
the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, El Hadji Malick Sow (21 February
2012):
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=11848&LangID=E
Joint statement of more than 30
non-governmental human rights organizations (23 February 2012):
http://www.euromedrights.org/en/news-en/emhrn-releases/statements-2012/11255.html
Statement from the High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Mrs Catherine
Ashton (20 February 2012):
http://www.enpi-info.eu/medportal/news/latest/28034/Ashton-condemns-arrest-of-Mazen-Darwish,-head-of-Syrian-Centre-for-Media-and-Freedom-of-Expression 