Russian Federation:  Physical assault of Mr. Sirazhutdin Datsiyev
April  3, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2018 / AprilRussian Federation: Physical assault of Mr. Sirazhutdin Datsiyev

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
RUS 002 / 0418
/ OBS 037
Physical
assault /
Harassment
Russian
Federation
April 3,
2018
 
The Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in the Republic of Dagestan, Russian Federation.
 
Description
of the situation: 
 
The Observatory has been informed by
reliable sources about the physical assault of Mr. Sirazhutdin Datsiyev, Head
of the Human Rights Center (HRC) Memorial office in Dagestan.
 
According to the information
received, on March 28, 2018, unidentified person(s), physically assaulted Mr.
Sirazhutdin Datsiyev as he was leaving his house in Makhachkala to go to work.
As he walked out, he noticed a car with dark tinted windows and heard footsteps
approaching from behind, before being hit on the head and falling on the
ground. 
 
Although Mr. Sirazhutdin Datsiyev
was not able to identify the attacker(s), a witness to the incident later
informed him that a man had jumped out of the car and hit him on the head,
before running back to the car and leaving.
 
Mr. Sirazhutdin Datsiyev was later
admitted to the neurosurgical department of the Republican Clinical Hospital,
where he was treated for moderate injuries and diagnosed with brain concussion,
chest bruise and multiple injuries. Police was alerted of the incident
immediately thereafter and is reportedly investigating it.
 
The Observatory expresses its utmost
concerns following the assault of Mr. Sirazhutdin Datsiyev as this is the
latest in a string of attacks targeting HRC Memorial and its members, as a
retaliation for their work in North Caucasus and aimed at intimidating and
silencing them. 
 
Indeed, these events come at a time
when HRC Memorial staff in Dagestan have received threats of reprisals for
their work via SMS and phone calls from unidentified individuals. In addition,
on January 22, 2018 the car used by HRC Memorial's staff in Dagestan was set on
fire.
 
The Observatory recalls that the
Head of HRC Memorial in the neighbouring Republic of Chechnya, Mr. Oyub Titiev, was detained on January 9,
2018, put in pre-trial detention and subsequently falsely charged with
possession of drugs[1].
The defender and his family were threatened by law enforcement authorities in
an attempt to extract a confession. His lawyers have also faced acts of
intimidation and harassment. Additionally, on January 17, 2018, HRC Memorial
premises in Nazran, Ingushetia were the target of an arson attack. 
 
The Observatory urges the Russian
authorities to ensure the physical and psychological integrity and security of
Mr. Sirazhutdin Datsiyev, Mr. Oyub Titiev, all HRC Memorial members and their
relatives and to conduct an immediate, thorough, impartial and transparent
investigation into the physical assault of Mr. Sirazhutdin Datsiyev as well as
into the arson attack of HRC Memorial premises in Ingushetia
and car in Dagestan, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them
before an independent tribunal, and sanction them as provided by the law.
 
The Observatory further urges the
Russian authorities to immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Oyub Titiev
and to put an end to all acts of harassment against him, all HRC Memorial
members and human rights defenders in the North Caucasus. In the meantime, the
Observatory urges Russian authorities to uphold his right to a fair trial.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Russia, urging
them to: 
 
i. Take all necessary
measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity and security of
Mr. Sirazhutdin Datsiyev, Mr. Oyub Titiev, HRC Memorial members and all human
rights defender in the Russian Federation;
 
ii. Conduct an immediate,
thorough, impartial and transparent investigation into the physical assault of
Mr. Sirazhutdin Datsiyev as well as into the arson attack of
HRC Memorial premises in Ingushetia and car in
Dagestan in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before an
independent tribunal, and sanction them as provided by the law
 
iii.
Release Mr. Oyub Titiev immediately and unconditionally, as his detention is
arbitrary since it merely aims at sanctioning his peaceful and legitimate human rights
activities;
 
iv. Put an end to all acts
of harassment, including at the judicial level, against all HRC Memorial
members as well as all human rights defenders in Russia, including by putting
an end to all forms of surveillance of their activities by local enforcement
officials, and ensure in all circumstances that
they are able to carry out their legitimate activities without any hindrance or
fear of reprisals;
 
v. Publicly recognise at the level of the President of the Russian
Federation the crucial role of human
rights defenders as pillars of democracy and watchdogs of the rule of
law and publicly condemn all attacks against human rights defenders,
particularly in the Chechen Republic;
 
vi.
Comply with all the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly, in particular with Articles 1, 12.1 and 12.2;
 
vii.
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
in accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by the Russian Federation.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
Mr. Vladimir Putin, President of the
Russian Federation, Fax: + 7 495 606 3602; + 7 495 625 3581
·    
Mr. Dimitri Medvedev, Prime Minister
of the Russian Federation, Twitter: @MedvedevRussia
·    
Mr. Sergueï Lavrov, Minister of
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, Fax: + 7 495 644 2203
·    
Permanent Mission of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 734 40 44,
E-mail: mission.russian@vtxnet.ch
·    
Embassy of the Russian Federation in
Brussels, Belgium. Fax: +32 2 374 26 13. E-mail: amrusbel@skynet.be
·    
Permanent Representation of the
Russian Federation to the Council of Europe, France. Fax: (+33) (0) 3 88 24 19
74. Email: russia.coe@orange.fr
 
Please also
write to the diplomatic representations of Russia in your respective countries.
 
 ***
 
Paris-Geneva,
April 3, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union
Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·       
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·       
Tel and
fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·       
Tel and fax OMCT: +41 22 809 49 39 / 41 22 809
49 29



[1]                See the Observatory’s Urgent Appeal RUS
001 / 0118 / OBS 004.3 published on March 20, 2018. 