Ilham Tohti  2016 Martin Ennals Award Laureate  for Human Rights Defender
October 11, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2016 / OctoberIlham Tohti  2016 Martin Ennals Award Laureate  for Human Rights Defender

​Ilham Tohti was selected by a jury of 10 global human rights organizations (See list
below). The Award is given to Human Rights Defenders who have shown deep commitment
and face great personal risk. The aim of the award is to provide protection
through international recognition. Strongly supported by the City of Geneva,
the Award will be presented on Oct. 11th. 

Ilham
Tohti (China) 
 
A renowned Uyghur intellectual in China, Ilham Tohti
has worked for two decades to foster dialogue and understanding between Uyghurs
and Han Chinese. He has rejected separatism and violence, and sought
reconciliation based on a respect for Uyghur culture, which has been subject to
religious, cultural and political repression in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous
Region.
 
In 1994 he began to write about problems and abuses
in Xinjiang, which led to official surveillance. From 1999 to 2003 he was
barred from teaching. Since then the authorities have also made it impossible
for him to publish in normal venues. As a response, he turned to the Internet
to broaden public awareness of the economic, social and developmental issues
confronting the Uyghurs. In 2006 he established Uyghurbiz.net, a Chinese-language
site, to foster dialogue and understanding between Uyghurs and Han Chinese.
Over the course of its existence, it has been shut down periodically, and
people writing for it have been harassed. 
 
In 2009, he was arrested for several weeks after
posting information on Uyghurs who had been arrested, killed and “disappeared”
during and after protests. In the following years he was periodically subjected
to house arrest, and in 2013, while bound to take up a post as a visiting
scholar at Indiana University, USA, he was detained at the airport and
prevented from leaving China.
 
On January 15, 2014, Ilham Tohti was arrested on
charges of separatism and sentenced to life imprisonment, after a two-day
trial. Numerous statements were issued by Western governments and the European
Union condemning his trial and sentence, and in early 2016 several hundred
academics petitioned the Chinese leadership for his release.
 
Upon his nomination as a Finalist for the Martin
Ennals Award earlier this year, his daughter stated: “My father Ilham Tohti has
used only one weapon in his struggle for the basic rights of the Uyghurs of
Xinjiang: Words; spoken, written, distributed, and posted. This is all he has
ever had at his disposal, and all that he has ever needed. And this is what
China found so threatening. A person like him doesn't deserve to be in prison
for even a day.”  
 
Martin Ennals Foundation Chair Dick Oosting stated “The real shame of this situation is that by
eliminating the moderate voice of Ilham Tohti the Chinese Government is in fact
laying the groundwork for the very extremism it says it wants to prevent”. 
 
The
two other finalists received Martin Ennals Prizes:
 
Razan Zaitouneh (Syria)  

 
Razan has dedicated her life to defending political prisoners,
documenting violations, and helping others free themselves from oppression. She
founded the Violations Documentation Center (VDC), which documents the death
toll and ill-treatment in Syria's prisons. She had started to cover all sides
in the conflict when she was kidnapped, alongside with her husband and two
colleagues, on 9 December 2013. Her whereabouts remain unknown.
 
Zone 9 Bloggers (Ethiopia)

 
Kality prison in Ethiopia, has 8 zones and holds
many journalists and political prisoners. 9 young activists called themselves
‘Zone 9’ as a symbol for Ethiopia as a whole. They document human rights abuses
and shed light on the situation of political prisoners in Ethiopia. Six of its
members were arrested and charged with terrorism. Although they have now been
released, three are in exile while four of the six remaining in in Ethiopia are
still facing charges and are banned from travel.
 
The main award of the human rights
movement. The Martin Ennals Award for Human Rights Defenders
(MEA) is a unique collaboration among ten of the world’s leading human rights
organizations to give protection to
human rights defenders worldwide.  The Jury is composed of the following NGOs:

 
Martin Ennals
Award Jury:
 
-  Amnesty International                                   - EWDE
Germany
- World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)     - Front Line Defenders
- Human Rights First                                        -
Human Rights Watch
- International Commission of Jurists                 -
HURIDOCS
- International Service for Human Rights            -
FIDH
 

More
information is available on www.martinennalsaward.org
 
Contact:
Michael Khambatta, Director of the Martin Ennals Foundation: khambatta@martinennalsaward.org / +41 79 474 8208 