Bangladesh:  Joint Press Release: UN Day for Victims of Torture - an Urgent Call for Justice
June 25, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / Bangladesh / 2015 / JuneBangladesh: Joint Press Release: UN Day for Victims of Torture - an Urgent Call for JusticeBangladeshPR_OMCT_Odhikar_26 June2 pages / 375 KB​

Geneva–Dhaka, 26th of June 2015. On the occasion
of the International Day in Support of Victims of Torture, the World
Organisation against Torture (OMCT) and its member organization in Bangladesh,
Odhikar, demand justice for victims of torture and extra judicial killings.
 
“Two years ago, Bangladesh passed
the Torture and Custodial Death (Prevention) Act 2013; and committed itself to
eradicating torture. Yet torture and impunity remain widespread in Bangladesh.
No serious efforts have been made to give effect to the said Act or the UN
Convention against Torture. Hundreds of victims of torture and their families are
awaiting justice” says Adilur Rahman Khan, Secretary of Odhikar
 
Today on June 26, 2015 we want to commemorate and pay tribute to the
numerous victims of torture and their families, some of which are named below:
 
- Rezaul
Islam, from Khayersuti village, was picked up from his
house by the Detective Branch (DB) police in May 2015. He was beaten with
chains and taken to the Pabna Sadar Police Station. He died in police custody
later the same day. The police claimed that Rezaul was a drug addict and a drug
peddler and had died of a heart attack after his arrest.
- Jahangir Hossain was arrested in March
2015 as a suspect in a robbery. He was subsequently granted two-day remand by
the Magistrate. One day later, the police claimed that Jahangir had committed
suicide by hanging himself in his cell. As there were wounds on different parts
of his body, his family claimed that the police had beaten him to death.
Jahangir’s father was given 10 thousand taka and threatened that if he speaks
to anyone about his son’s death, he and his other sons would face the same
consequences.
- Mizanur Rahman was arrested for allegations
of beating a police officer in March 2015. In the police station. he was
severely beaten by three police officers till he became unconscious. Five days
later, Mizanur was produced before the court. As he could not walk, two
policemen physically supported him to the courtroom. Despite his visibly severe
physical condition and despite showing the marks of torture to the judge, the
court refused to grant him bail. 
-  Shapla Khatun, from Mathail Chapar village under Kazipur upazila in
Sirajganj District, was arrested as a murder suspect in January 2015 and
tortured in Kazipur Police Station for six days. Her family and lawyer alleged
that police arrested Shapla due to a telephone conversation with an accused
murderer. Police took one hundred thousand taka as a bribe from her family.
Shapla’s lawyer brought up the matter of torture before the Court, when police
produced her before the Court after six days of arrest and sought remand.
 
These victims, their families, as well as many, many
other torture victims are awaiting independent investigations and
rehabilitation, as per the CAT and the Act of 2013. On the day dedicated to
torture victims, Odhikar and the OMCT urge Bangladesh to take effective steps
to effectively implement the landmark Convention against Torture and the Torture and Custodial Death (Prevention) Act. 
“17 years ago,
Bangladesh ratified the Convention against Torture and promised to prevent
torture, to condemn any act of torture and to meet the needs of victims. It is
time that Bangladesh steps up to its obligations and develops an action plan that
includes the submission of the very first state report to the Committee against
Torture” says Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of the OMCT.
Every year, Odhikar conducts a series of events, including rallies and
public awareness events in several districts to commemorate this international
day condemning torture and ill treatment and remembering the victims. The
events are part of OMCT’s global campaign entitled ‘nothing can justify torture
under any circumstances’.
 
 
For further information please contact:
- Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General, Email: gs@omct.org, Tel:
(0041) (0)22 809 49 23
 
- ASM Nasiruddin Elan, Director, Odhikar, Email: odhikar.bd@gmail.com, Tel: (0088) (0) 2 988 85 87
 
 
The OMCT wishes to thank the European Commission for their financial
support to the OMCT global campaign on June 26 ‘nothing can justify torture
under any circumstances’. 