Russian Federation:  Concerns over the escalating judicial and administrative harassment of the Anti-Discrimination Centre (ADC) Memorial
August  2, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2013 / AugustRussian Federation: Concerns over the escalating judicial and administrative harassment of the Anti-Discrimination Centre (ADC) Memorial

RUSSIAN FEDERATION: OPEN LETTER
TO THE AUTHORITIES
 
To:

Mr.
Vladimir Lukin
Human Rights
Commissioner of Russia 
Tel: +7 495
607-19-22 / 607-34-67, E-mail: press-sl@ropnet.ru
 
Mr
Alexander Shishlov
Human Rights
Commissioner of Saint Petersburg
ashishlov@gmail.com
 
Mr Mikhail Fedotov 
Chairman of the
Presidential Council for Civil Society and Human Rights 
Tel: +7 495 606-41-84, Fax:
+7 495 606-48-55; E-mail: president-sovet@mail.ru; fedotov_MA@gov.ru
 
Paris-Geneva, August 2, 2013
 
 
Re: Concerns over the escalating judicial and administrative harassment of the
Anti-Discrimination Centre (ADC) Memorial
 
 
Excellencies,
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), is writing to you to express deep concern regarding the escalating harassment undertaken against ADC
Memorial. 
 
According to the information received, ADC Memorial is
currently facing four cases brought against them by:
 
1)    
The prosecutor of the
Admiralty district of St Petersburg on April 30, 2013, based on the
Administrative Code;
2)    
The prosecutor's office of the Admiralty district of
St Petersburg on July 12, 2013, based on the Code on Civil Procedure;
3)    
The Ministry of the Russian Federation for Civil
Defense, Emergencies and Elimination of Consequences of Natural Disasters
(EMERCOM) on May 22, 2013;
4)   
The Federal Service on Customers' Rights
Protection and Human Well-being Surveillance (RosPotrebNadzor) on June 13,
2013.

The Observatory has
indeed been informed that on July 12, 2013 the
prosecutor's office filed a case against ADC Memorial at the Leninsky District
Court of St Petersburg. The hearing is expected to take place no later than
August 5, 2013. The lawsuit is based on Article 45, part 1 of the Code on Civil
Procedure, which allows the prosecutor to turn to the court in the interest of
an 'unspecified group of citizens'. The
prosecutor argues that ADC Memorial is involved in political activities and
receives foreign funding, and that it should therefore register as a 'foreign agent[1]. He further claims that ADC Memorial's reports,
allegedly of political nature, can reach an 'unspecified group of citizens',
whose interests must be protected “through the registration of ADC Memorial as
a 'foreign agent'”.
 
Previously, on April 30, 2013, the prosecutor of the
Admiralty district of St Petersburg had brought another case against ADC
Memorial, based on the Administrative Code, Article 19.34, part 1 and 2 (i.e. failing to register as a
“foreign agent” and not placing the status of 'foreign agent' on its publications).
This was preceded by an inspection of the premises of ADC Memorial. 
 
On May 27, 2013,
District Court no. 8 of St Petersburg had rejected the case after judge O. A.
Glushanok found that the evidence brought by the prosecutor's office was
inconclusive as no evidence could prove that the ADC Memorial was a 'foreign
agent'. Consecutive appeals of the
prosecutor were likewise rejected, and as of today the latter can no longer
appeal the decision. However, on July 17, 2013, he nonetheless lodged a
'protest'[2] to
contest the May-27 decision, and the case is presently ongoing. 
 
The Observatory
believes that this 'protest' is a ploy to circumvent the May 27, 2013 decision
of the District Court no. 8 of St Petersburg. The Observatory is all the more
concerned that this attempt follows president Vladimir Putin's meeting with the
General Prosecutor Yury Chaika on July 9. 2013, when Mr. Putin insisted that
the law on NGOs 'be applied and executed to all without exceptions'. 
 
The current
proceedings also set a dangerous precedent of the prosecutor acting on behalf
of an 'unspecified group of citizens', whose interests are not specified
either. 
 
Finally, the two
other above-mentioned cases, lodged by EMERCOM and RosPotrebNadzor, add to the
harassment. The case lodged by EMERCOM refer to the allegedly insufficient fire
protection at the premises of ADC Memorial and to the quality of the walls in
the office that ADC Memorial rents in the business center. RosPotrebNadzor has charged ADC Memorial
and its Program Director Stephania Kulaeva on the grounds that ADC
Memorial is not equipped with “instruments that measure the levels of noise,
magnetic emissions of electrical devices, the quality of lightning and the
micro-climate in the office”. The hearing is planned for August 6, 2013.
 
Excellencies, these four cases brought against ADC Memorial in
the recent months are evidence of the escalating atmosphere of harassment
against NGOs in the Russian Federation and aim at delegitimising and paralysing
their work. The recent actions taken by the prosecutor of the Admiralty
district of St Petersburg are particularly persistent and harmful, as they aim
at circumventing court decisions.
 
In
light of the situation, the Observatory respectfully urges you to:
 
-      monitor the
developments concerning the acts of harassment faced by ADC Memorial and other
NGOs currently targeted throughout the country;
-      take a public stance
on the violations of international law currently undertaken on the basis of the
Law on “Foreign Agents”;
-      call on the government
to put an end to any kind of harassment against NGOs and human rights defenders
in the country;
-      to call on the
government to abide in particular by the provisions of the United Nations
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on
December 9, 1998, especially:
-      its Article 1, which
states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-      its Article 5, which
provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, at the national and international levels (a) to meet or assemble
peacefully”;
-      and Article 12.2,
which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
(...) Declaration”.
 
We sincerely hope that you will take these elements into account.
 
Yours
faithfully, 
 
Karim LAHIDJI                                                Gerald STABEROCK
FIDH President                                               OMCT Secretary General



[1]           
According to the law on “Foreign Agents”, which came into force in
November 2012 in Russia, any NGO conducting a “political activity” and
receiving foreign financial aid is now considered a “foreign agent” and must register
as such. This law provides for fines of up to 300,000 rubles (about 9,500 USD)
and 2 years' imprisonment for the director of any organisation breaching one of
the provisions, and for fines of up to 500,000 rubles (16,000 USD) for the
organisations themselves.


[2]            A ‘protest’ is another way in which
a prosecutor can appeal decisions, including decisions of courts in
administrative cases. 