Russian Federation:  Olga and the paradox of fighting torture: Revealing legal dysfunctionality, building trust
December  1, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Links / Russian Federation / 2015 / DecemberRussian Federation: Olga and the paradox of fighting torture: Revealing legal dysfunctionality, building trust
December
1st, Nizhny
Novgorod (Russian Federation) – Olga Sadovskaya does not shout, or carry banners in the streets; nor does she complain
about the threats and insulting graffiti she regularly finds
painted on the fence around her house. 
 
This sober 36-year-old lawyer, who
practices yoga in her spare time, has put her legal
skills and intellectual rigor in the service of the cause of righting abuses
and fighting torture in her home country, Russia, by keeping it on the top of
the political agenda. 
 
As
Deputy Director of the Committee Against Torture, the award-winning human rights
organization providing psychosocial and legal
assistance to victims, she focuses on winning legal
victories in torture cases by thorough investigative groundwork, sophisticated medical
reports and legal expertise. 
 
“Everyone should care about torture because anyone could be the next victim,” Olga says. “If torture is condoned
or indeed widespread, it means that the State’s legal system is not working
properly, not only when torture is involved, but at all levels.”
 
Torture works like a litmus test. If it is accompanied by impunity, the
legal system is dysfunctional. “There is no guarantee that the law will work
properly in ordinary, day-to-day situations, as when someone asks for a bank
loan, sues for damages, needs her child to be protected from abuse or her
mother to be provided with anaesthesia”, she
explains.
 
The work pays off. In the 13 years she has been with the Committee, she
and her colleagues have filed 84 complaints at the European Court of Human
Rights, managed to put more than 100 police officers in jail for torture, with clients
receiving almost 46 million roubles (700,000 USD) in compensation, and several
lives being saved by evacuation from Chechnya. 
 
Olga describes her work as a constant challenge given the Russian
Government’s attempts to close down independent human rights organizations.  For lack of substantive arguments, the
Government accuses the Committee – partially funded by international donors, as
most NGOs – of being a foreign agent, in order to prevent it from accessing funds
that allow it to function. 
 
This is a commonly used tactic against
human rights activists. Rather
than simply banning an NGO, some States block its access to external funding by a variety of
restrictive measures
– legal, administrative or practical – which bein, less obvious, are less
likely to draw
international condemnation. 
 
Although, as a result, the Committee might run out of money within three
months, Olga keeps ploughing through her cases with unwavering faith that her
work is about restoring trust in the State. 
 
– by Lori Brumat in Geneva
To
know more about the "10 December, 10 Defenders" campaign, click here.
 
Pledge
your voice, an action, or funds and help us support 10 HRD continue their fight
against torture!
 
 

OMCT
wishes to thank the OAK Foundation, the European Union and the Republic
and Canton of Geneva for their support. Its content
is the sole responsibility of OMCT and should in no way be interpreted as
reflecting the view(s) of the supporting institutions. 