Egypt:  Joint Statement: A Presidential Pardon Frees some WHRDs, while Others are Still Detained or Not Included
September 28, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Egypt / 2015 / SeptemberEgypt: Joint Statement: A Presidential Pardon Frees some WHRDs, while Others are Still Detained or Not IncludedEgypt_2015.09.26_Joint_English2 pages / 76 KB 26 September 2015On 23 September 2015, a Presidential Decree was issued, No. 386 for
the year 2015, for the complete pardon of 100 detainees for the remainder of
their imprisonment verdict and subsequent monitoring, including women human
rights defenders (WHRDs) in the case known as the Ittihadia Presidential Palace
Case, and the subsequent monitoring of 2 years, namely: Ms. Yara Sallam, Ms. Sanaa
Seif, Ms. Samar Ibrahim, Ms. Hanan Mohamed, Ms. Fekreya Mohamed (known as Rania
ElSheikh), Ms. Salwa Mihriz and Ms. Nahed Sherif (known as Nahed Bibo). While
Yara, Sanaa, Hanan, Samar and Fekreya have been released, Salwa and Nahed are
still detained in Qanater Women's Prison, despite the concerned presidential
pardon. Moreover, the list of those pardoned did not include WHRD and Lawyer
Mahienour El-Massry, who is currently detained in Al-Aba'adeya Women's Prison
in Beheira governorate, in the case known as ElRaml Police Station Case, while
other activists detained on the same case, were among those pardoned.
While the release of the concerned WHRDs is welcomed, it is only
natural, and may have been conducted quite late, since their imprisonment came
as a result of the application of the Protest and Public Assembly Law No. 107
for the year 2013, that is unconstitutional and does not adhere to
international standards, and any day spent in prison is far too long. Furthermore,
the delay in the release of both Ms. Salwa Mihriz and Ms. Nahed Sherif is quite
atrocious, especially that Ms. Mihriz's release is halted by the fact that her
name is not written correctly in the pardon decision. As for Ms. Mahienour
El-Massry, it is feared that her exclusion from the concerned pardon is a
result of her being targeted for her well-known
and prominent human rights activism. 
Subsequently, the undersigned organizations urge
the Egyptian authorities to promptly release both Ms. Salwa Mihriz and Ms.
Nahed Sherif today, so they can celebrate El-Adha holidays with their families
and loved ones, in addition to issuing a supplement to the presidential pardon
to include Ms. Mahienour El-Massry so she can join the referred to WHRDs in their
righteous freedom, especially that they should not have been imprisoned in the
first place, and for the Egyptian authorities to adhere to international
declarations and treaties that ensure the protection of women human rights
defenders, respect for their work and acknowledgement of the important human
rights activism they conduct. 
The Signed Organizations:
1. Nazra for Feminist Studies
2. Association for Women in Development
3. Urgent Action Fund for Women's Human Rights
4. Association for Progressive Communications (APC)
5. Consorcio para el Diálogo Parlamentario y la Equidad Oaxaca 
6. Global Fund for Women (GFW) 
7. The International Network Of Women's Fund (INWF) 
8. Jass – Asociadas por lo Justo (Mesoamerica) 
9. MADRE:
Demanding Rights, Resources & Results for Women Worldwide 
10. Urgent
Action Fund for Women's Human Rights 
11. World
Organization against Torture (OMCT) 
12. WO=MEN Dutch
Gender Platform 