Saudi Arabia:  Incommunicado detention of WHRD Hatoon Al Fassi
July  6, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Saudi Arabia / 2018 / JulySaudi Arabia: Incommunicado detention of WHRD Hatoon Al Fassi​SAU 004 / 0718 / OBS 093Incommunicado detention / 
Judicial harassment 
Saudi Arabia
July 6, 2018
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
Saudi Arabia.
 
Description
of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by ALQST about the arbitrary arrest and incommunicado
detention of Ms. Hatoon Al Fassi, a
prominent Saudi advocate for women’s right, including women’s participation to
municipal elections and women’s right to drive. Ms. Hatoon Al Fassi is also
associated professor of women’s history at King Saud University in Riyadh.
 
According
to the information received, Ms. Hatoon Al Fassi was arrested on June 24, 2018.
The circumstances of her arrest remain however unclear, and she has since been
detained in an undisclosed location.

Prior to her arrest, Ms. Hatoon Al Fassi had stated that she was under a travel
ban since June 19, 2018.
 
Ms.
Hatoon Al Fassi was the first woman to drive since the driving ban was officially
lifted on June 24, 2018. Additionally, she was set to be interviewed by French
media France 2 to talk about the lift
of the driving ban shortly after June 24, 2018.
 
The
Observatory condemns in the strongest terms the arrest and incommunicado
detention of Ms. Hatoon Al Fassi and urges the Saudi authorities to immediately
disclose her whereabouts as well as to ensure unhindered access to her family and
lawyers.
 
The
Observatory further recalls that ahead of the official lift of the driving ban
the Saudi authorities launched a crackdown on human rights defenders in the
country. As of publication of this Urgent Appeal, Ms. Nouf Abdulaziz,
Ms. Mayya Al-Zahrani, Ms. Eman
al-Nafjan, Ms. Aziza
al-Youssef, Ms. Loujain
al-Hathloul, Mr. Mohammed
al-Rabiah, Mr. Mohamed al-Bejadi, Mr. Abdulaziz Al-Mesha'al and Mr. Ibrahim
al-Mudaimeegh remained detained[1]. While pro-governmental media
outlets reported that they have been arrested under vague accusations of
“suspicious contacts with foreign entities” and “financial support to enemies
overseas”, no formal charges have yet been reportedly pressed against them. Moreover,
they are reportedly all detained in solitary confinement, without access to
their lawyers and they could only speak with their families once or twice since
their arrests.
 
The Observatory urges the Saudi authorities to release the
above-mentioned human rights defenders immediately and unconditionally, and to put
an end to all acts of harassment against them as well as all human rights
defenders in Saudi Arabia as this
wave of arrests and arbitrary detentions, only seems to aim at sanctioning
peaceful and legitimate human rights activities in particular in defence of
women’s human rights.

Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Saudi Arabia asking them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Hatoon Al Fassi, Ms. Nouf Abdulaziz, Ms. Mayya Al-Zahrani, Ms. Eman al-Nafjan, Ms. Aziza al-Youssef, Ms.
Loujain al-Hathloul, Mr. Mohammed al-Rabiah, Mr. Mohamed al-Bejadi, Mr. Abdulaziz Al-Mesha'al and Mr. Ibrahim al-Mudaimeegh as well as of all
detained human rights defenders in Saudi Arabia;
 
ii. Immediately disclose Ms. Hatoon Al Fassi, Ms. Nouf
Abdulaziz, Ms. Mayya Al-Zahrani and Mr. Mohamed al-Bejadi’s whereabouts;
 
iii. Ensure all detained human rights
defenders have unhindered access to their family and lawyers;
 
iv. Immediately and
unconditionally release Ms. Hatoon Al Fassi. Ms.
Nouf Abdulaziz, Ms. Mayya Al-Zahrani, Ms. Eman al-Nafjan,
Ms. Aziza al-Youssef, Ms. Loujain al-Hathloul, Mr. Mohammed al-Rabiah, Mr. Mohamed al-Bejadi, Mr. Abdulaziz Al-Mesha'al and Mr. Ibrahim al-Mudaimeegh
and all detained human rights defenders in Saudi Arabia, as
their detention is arbitrary since it only aims at punishing them for their
legitimate human rights activities;
 
v. Put an end to all forms
of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Ms. Hatoon Al Fassi, Ms. Nouf Abdulaziz, Ms. Mayya Al-Zahrani, Ms. Eman al-Nafjan, Ms. Aziza al-Youssef, Ms.
Loujain al-Hathloul, Mr. Mohammed al-Rabiah, Mr. Mohamed al-Bejadi, Mr. Abdulaziz Al-Mesha'al and Mr. Ibrahim al-Mudaimeegh and all human rights defenders in the country so they are able to carry out
their work without unjustified hindrance and fear of reprisal;
 
vi. Comply in all circumstances with all the
provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in
particular its Articles 1, 6(c) and 12.2;
 
vii. More generally, ensure in all circumstances the
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with
international human rights standards and instruments.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
His Majesty, King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, King of Saudi Arabia and
Custodian of the two Holy Mosques, Fax: (via Ministry of the Interior) +966 11
403 3125; Email: info@moi.gov.sa; Twitter: @KingSalman
·    
His Excellency, Mohammad Bin Salman Al Saud, Crown Prince of Saudi
Arabia, Fax: (via Ministry of the Interior) +966 11 403 3125; Email:
info@moi.gov.sa
·    
H.E. Waleed bin Mohammad Al Samaani, Minister of Justice, Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, Fax: + 966 11 405 7777; Email: info@moj.gov.sa
·    
His Royal Highness Prince Abdulaziz Bin Saud Bin Naif Bin Abdulaziz,
Minister of Interior, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Fax: + 966 11 401 1111 / + 966
11 401 1944 / + 966 11 403 1125; Email: info@moi.gov.sa
·    
H.E. Adel bin Ahmed El Jubeir, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax: + 966
11 403 0645 ; Email: info@mofa.gov.sa
·    
H.E. Abdulaziz Alwasil, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia to the United Nations Office in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22
758 00 00. Email: saudiamission@bluewin.ch
·    
H.E. Abdulrahman bin Soliman Al-Ahmed, Ambassador, Embassy of Saudi
Arabia in Brussels, Belgium. Fax: +32 2 6468538. Email: beemb@mofa.gov.sa
 
Please also write to the diplomatic representations of Saudi Arabia in
your respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, July 6, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the
protection of human rights defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in
their time of need. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.




[1] See the Observatory Urgent Appeal SAU 003 / 0518 / OBS 073.2 published
on June 21, 2018. 