India:  Alleged torture and ill-treatment to which Mr. Sanjenbam Robertker was subjected during his detention by members of the Manipur Police Commandos
October  3, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / India / 2011 / OctoberIndia: Alleged torture and ill-treatment to which Mr. Sanjenbam Robertker was subjected during his detention by members of the Manipur Police Commandos​Case IND 031011Alleged torture
and ill-treatment/ No effective investigation/ Fear for the safety
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requestsyour URGENT intervention
in the following situation in India/ Manipur.
Brief description of the situation
The International Secretariat
of OMCT has been informed by the Centre for Organisation Research &
Education (CORE), a member of the OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the alleged
torture and ill-treatment to which Mr. Sanjenbam
Robertker, a 29-year-old man from Imphal West District in Manipur, was
subjected during his detention by members of the Manipur Police Commandos
supervised by sub-inspector Tarun Kumar, in the city of Lamphel, in the state
of Manipur. 
According to the information
received, on 18 September 2011 at about 1:30 pm, Mr. Sanjenbam Robertker was waiting for his
girlfriend who was taking the B. Sc. Nursing examination at the Regional
Institute of Medical Sciences (RIMS) Lamphel when he was asked by two members
of the Indian Reserve Battalion (IRB) what he was doing at this place. After he
explained the reason, the two left and a few minutes later a team of the
Manipur Police Commandos arrived in a bullet proof vehicle (Rakshak jeep) and
Mr. Sanjenbam Robertker was forced by the police officers into the police
commando vehicle without any warrant of arrest or giving any reason. He was
blindfolded and his hands were tied behind his back, then the police officers
drove him to an unknown place, where he was beaten up in order to extract a
confession, first forcing him to admit the abuse of narcotic substances and
then after some time to admit sympathizing with the People’s Liberation Army
(PLA), People’s Revolutionary Party of Kangleipak (PREPAK) and the Kangleipak
Communist Party (KCP) (armed opposition groups operating in the North-eastern
region of India and based in Manipur). Mr. Sanjenbam Robertker was asked to
confess several times by different persons and eventually he was given an
ultimatum of one hour to confess any of these charges. Later, Mr. Sanjenbam
Robertker was taken to the RIMS in order to get medication and, in the evening
of the same day, he was handed over to the Lamphel police station. 
According to the same
information received, the family members of Mr. Sanjenbam Robertker, concerned
about his whereabouts in the evening, were not able to reach him since his
mobile phone was turned off. On 19 September 2011, one of his
sisters tried to call him again when an unidentified person answered the phone
and told her that Mr. Sanjenbam Robertker was at the Lamphel police station.
Some family members went to the police station but they were not allowed to
meet him. They were informed that he will be brought before the District
Judge`s Court, Cheirap Court Complex, Uripok, Imphal at 01:00 pm on the same
day. His family members were therefore waiting at the court complex with a
lawyer when the police came with Mr. Sanjenbam Robertkar at 04:00 pm. Since he
was not able to move, sit or walk the family organised a chair from the court
and carried him into the courtroom. He was released on bail by the District and
Session Judge of Imphal West, Mr. Ibomcha, reportedly because of his extremely
poor physical condition and the next hearing was fixed for the 3 October 2011. 
Mr. Sanjenbam Robertker was
reportedly so severely beaten that he was not able to ingest solid food and
therefore had to be fed through the nose. His left ankle was swollen, his
buttocks were covered with bruises, his head was hurt on the left back side and
he suffered from headache. He was unable to sit or talk, he suffered from
dental pain and immobility of his right hand. According to the same information
Mr. Sanjenbam Robertker is treated at the Shija Hospitals and Research
Institute Pvt. Ltd, Lamgol, Imphal. 
To date, no effective
investigation has been reportedly carried out into the aforementioned event. 
The International Secretariat of OMCT is
gravely concerned about the safety of Mr. Sanjenbam Robertker and urges the competent
authorities to guarantee his physical and
psychological integrity at all times. OMCT recalls that the
authorities have to fulfil their obligations under international human rights
law to protect the right not to be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment and to bringing to justice those
responsible for violating this right.
Accordingly,
OMCT calls upon the competent authorities to undertake a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial
investigation into the aforementioned allegations, in order to identify all
those responsible, bring them to trial and apply adequate sanctions. Finally,
OMCT recalls that the victims of torture and ill-treatment must be ensured the
right to an effective remedy for the human rights violations suffered as well
as the right to full redress, including compensation and rehabilitation. 
Actions Requested 
Please write to the
authorities in India urging them to:
i.                    
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Sanjenbam
Robertker; 
ii.                  
Carry
out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into
the aforementioned events, in particular the allegations of torture and
ill-treatment, in accordance with international human rights standards, the result of
which must be made public, in order to bring those responsible before a
competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or
administrative sanctions as provided by law; 
iii.                 
Ensure that an effective
remedy as well as the right to full redress, including compensation and
rehabilitation, is granted to Mr. Sanjenbam Robertker; 
iv.                
Guarantee
the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country
in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
Ø     
Smt. Pratibha Patil, President of India,
Rashtrapati Bhavan, New Delhi 110004, India, Fax + 91 11 233 82365/ + 91 11 237
11 772
Ø     
Shri. Manmohan Singh, Prime Minister of
India, Prime Minister’s Office, Room number 152, South Block, New Delhi 110011,
INDIA, Fax: + 91 11 23019545 / + 91 11 23016857 
      Email: manmohan@sansad.nic.in ; pmosb@pmo.nic.in 
Ø     
Dr. P. Chidambaram, Union Minister of Home
Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, 104-107 North Block, New Delhi 110 001
India. Fax: +91 11 2309 2979. Email: hm@nic.in ; pchidambi@yahoo.co.in
Ø     
Justice Kapadia, Chief Justice of India and
RK. Raghavan, Chairman of the Special Investigation Team, Supreme Court, Tilak
Marg, New Delhi 110 001,
India. Fax:
+ 91 11 233 83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.in
Ø     
Chairperson of the National Human Rights
Commission of India, Faridkot House, Copernicus Marg, New Delhi 110 001, India.
Fax: + 91 11 2334 0016, Email: covdnhrc@nic.in ;  ionhrc@nic.in ;chairnhrc@nic.in
Ø     
Mr. Okram Ibobi Singh, Chief Minister of
Manipur, Chief Minister’s Secretariat, Babupara, Imphal, 795001, Manipur,
India, Fax: + 91 385 222 1817, + 91 385 222 1817, Email: cmmani@hub.nic.in ;  cmmani@man.nic.in
Ø     
His Excellency Shri. Gurbachan Jagat,
Governor of Manipur, Raj Bhavan Imphal 795001, Manipur INDIA, govmani@hub.nic.in  Fax: + 91 385 2450278
Ø     
Permanent
Mission of India to the United Nations (Geneva),Rue
du Valais 9, 1202 Geneva, 
      Tel: +41 22 906 8686 Fax: + 41 22 906 86
96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
Please also write to the embassies of India in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 3 October 2011
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 