Israel:  Arbitrary use of administrative detention against a Palestinian man_Harsh conditions of arrest
June  1, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2011 / JuneIsrael: Arbitrary use of administrative detention against a Palestinian man_Harsh conditions of arrestCase
ISR 010611
Arbitrary use of administrative detention
against a Palestinian man/ Harsh conditions of arrest
The International Secretariat
of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in the following
situation in Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territories.
Brief description of the situation
The International Secretariat
of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source and Antenna International, a member organisation of OMCT
SOS-Torture Network, about the administrative detention of Mr. Ahmad Qatamish, 60 years old and permanent resident of
Al-Bireh (in the West Bank), as well as of the harsh conditions of his arrest.
According to the information
received, on 21 April 2011 at approximately 2 am, a group of Israeli soldiers arrested Mr.Ahmad Qatamish at his
brother’s home located in Ramallah. The Israeli soldiers had previously gone,
at approximately 1 am, to Mr.Ahmad Qatamish’s family home
in Al-Bireh to look for him. They reportedly surrounded the house before entering,
without producing any arrest warrant, and kept Mr.Ahmad Qatamish’s wife, his 22 years old daughter and two
other female relatives aged 14 and 69, in order to compel Mr.Ahmad Qatamish to surrender. The
soldiers reportedly aimed their guns at Mr.Ahmad Qatamish’s wife and daughter’s heads. They forced Mr. Ahmad Qatamish’s daughter, at
gunpoint, to call her father to ask for his surrender. A soldier then grabbed the
phone and threatened Mr. Ahmad Qatamish with destroying the house and continuing
to hold his family, if he did not comply. After his arrest, Mr.Ahmad Qatamish was transferred to Ofer Detention Centre,
located near Ramallah, where he was interrogated for 10 minutes about his
personal information, the Popular
Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) (including
whether he was a member or he knew anyone who is a member) and whether he had already been detained in Israel before. 
On 3 May 2011, at around 12 pm, the Ofer Military
Court reportedly informed Mr.Ahmad Qatamish’s lawyer that his client would be released
by 5.00 pm. However, at around 5:30 pm, Mr. Ahmad Qatamish’s lawyer was told that his
client’s detention would be extended. During more than two hours, Mr.Ahmad Qatamish’s lawyer received
contradictory information from the military court concerning the release of his
client before being informed, at around 8.30 pm, that the Israeli military
commander of the West Bank had issued an administrative detention order against
Mr. Ahmad Qatamish. At 11 pm, his lawyer and family were informed by the Israeli
Prison Service that the detention was ordered for six months. For about 3.5
hours, Mr.Ahmad Qatamish
was left without a clear legal status. 
According to the same information, the detention order issued on 3 May 2011 contained several format and content errors[1].
Although the order was signed by the Head of the Central Military Commander as
required by the Israeli
military legislation, it was stamped by a less senior Commander for the Region,
Mr. Yair Kolam. On 4 May
2011, the
Israeli military authorities issued a new detention order but it was once again
stamped by Mr. Yair Kolam. On 8 May 2011, the Ofer Military Judge
requested that the two previous detention orders be discarded and that a new
one be presented that was stamped by Mr. Avi Mizrahi, Head of the Central
Military Command.
According to Mr.Ahmad Qatamish’s current
administrative detention order, he is detained for posing an unspecified
security risk. The military judge reportedly claimed that the security risk was
related to Mr. Ahmad Qatamish’s alleged connections to the PFLP and his alleged “planning” of unspecified activities. On 15 May 2011,
during a closed hearing, where neither Mr. Ahmad Qatamish nor his lawyer were
allowed to assist, the Israel Securities Authorities (ISA) was meant to present
any secret evidence it had against Mr. Ahmad Qatamish to the Military Judge. On
19 May 2011, Mr. Ahmad
Qatamish was eventually informed that his detention order was approved by the
Military Judge for a period of four months. The military judge reportedly
considered that the mistakes made in the first two detention orders as well as
the few hours of illegal detention were balanced out by the security risk Mr.
Ahmad Qatamish would be posing. Mr. Ahmad Qatamish is now to be held detained,
without charge or trial, until 2 September 2011. 
Mr. Ahmad Qatamish has had reportedly
access to a doctor and he has regular access to his lawyer. However, to date,
his wife has not yet received the authorization needed to visit him. 
Background
Information
According to the same
information, several years ago, Mr. Ahmad Qatamish was arrested by Israeli authorities and detained
for a period of six years. He was arbitrarily detained for a year between 1992
and 1993, during which time he was allegedly tortured. From October 1993 to
1998, he was placed in administrative detention (the detention orders were
repeatedly renewed) before being released in 1998.
Israel has been holding
hundreds of persons from the Occupied Palestinian Territories (OPT) in administrative detention. In the occupied Palestinian West Bank, the Israeli army
carries out administrative detention on the basis of Military Order 1651, which
empowers military commanders to detain an individual for up to six months if
they have “reasonable grounds to presume that the security of the area or
public security require the detention.” On or just before the expiry date, the
detention order is also frequently renewed and this process can be continued
indefinitely.
Administrative detention deprives detainees of basic safeguards,
including the right to challenge the evidence on which the detention is based,
warrants are not required, and the detainee may be held in incommunicado
detention for an extended period, subject to renewal.
The United Nations Committee Against Torture has already
expressed concern that administrative detention does not conform with article
16 of the Convention[2].
This type of indefinite administrative detention, following manifestly unfair
proceedings, can amount to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
The International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its
deep concern about the situation of Mr.Ahmad
Qatamish and, in particular, the fact that the procedure under which his
administrative detention has been ordered does not meet international human
rights standards, including his right not to be
arbitrarily detained as well as his right to a fair trial and his absolute
right at all times not to be subjected to any cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment. 
Action requested
Please write to the
authorities in Israel urging them to:
i.                    
Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and
psychological integrity of Mr. Ahmad Qatamish; 
ii.                  
Guarantee immediate and full access to all members of
his family, adequate medical care and his lawyer;
iii.                 
Order his immediate release in the absence of valid
legal charges that are consistent with international legal standards, or, if such
charges exist, bring him promptly before an impartial, independent and
competent tribunal that will ensure due process at all times; 
iv.                
Guarantee that adequate compensation is awarded to Mr.Ahmad Qatamish and to his
family for the violation of their human rights;
v.                  
At all times ensure strict respect for international
human rights in the exercise of its jurisdiction, including in connection with
military operations in the Occupied Palestinian Territories.
Addresses
Ø     
Mr. Benjamin Netanyahu, Prime Minister,
Office of the Prime Minister, 3, Kaplan Street, PO Box 187, Kiryat Ben-Gurion,
Jerusalem, Israel, Fax: +972- 2-651
2631, Email: pm_eng@pmo.gov.il 
Ø     
Mr. Menachem Mazuz, Attorney General,
Fax: + 972 2 627 4481; + 972 2 628 5438;
+972 2 530 3367 
Ø     
Brigadier General Avihai Mandelblit, Military Judge
Advocate General, 6 David Elazar Street, Hakirya, Tel Aviv, Israel, Fax:  +972 3 608 0366, +972 3 569
4526, Email: arbel@mail.idf.il, avimn@idf.gov.il
Ø     
Permanent Mission
of Israel to the United Nations Office and Specialized Institutions in Geneva,
Avenue de la Paix 1-3, 1202 Geneva, Fax:
+41 22 716 05 55, Email: mission-israel@geneva.mfa.gov.il
Please also write to the
embassies of Israel in your respective
country.
***
Geneva, 1 June 2011
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.



[1]
According to
the information received, the detention order called for an extension of Mr.
Ahmad Qatamish’s administrative detention, despite the fact that it was his
first order in years. It also referred to him being a suspected Hamas activist
although the authorities had originally given the grounds of his arrest as his
membership of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, a claim that
Mr. Ahmad Qatamish has denied. It has also been tampered with using correction
fluid to include Mr. Ahmad Qatamish’s name. 


[2] CAT/C/ISR/CO/4, para 17. 