Guatemala:  Guatemala: disappearance of psychology professor
April 18, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Guatemala / 2000 / AprilGuatemala: Guatemala: disappearance of psychology professorGuatemala: disappearance of psychology professor  Case GTM 180400  The International Secretariat of the OMCT requests your urgent intervention in connection with the following situation in Guatemala.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of the OMCT   has been informed of the disappearance of Sra.  Mayra Angelina Gutiérrez Hernández, a professor at the School of psychology of the San Carlos University and of the Mariano Galvez University of Guatemala.  According to information received from the FAMDEGUA (the Guatemalan Association of families of detained and disappeared) Sra Mayra Angelina Gutierrez Hernandez disappeared on April 7th 2000.  In spite of all the inquiries made at hospitals,  emergency  clinics and detention centres, no more information is available to date concerning her personal situation or whereabouts.   Reports add that both her family and friends and the members of the FAMDEGUA are very concerned about her physical and psychological integrity in view of the fact that she was subjected to repressive measures in the past, presumably due to her active participation in movements demanding social improvements and also because information shows that she lost two brothers, apparently as a consequence of the repression.  The International Secretariat of the OMCT shares the grave concern of FAMDEGUA for the physical and psychological integrity of Prof. Mayra Angelina Gutierrez Hernandez.   Action requested  Please contact the Guatemalan authorities urging them to:  i.	adopt all necessary measures to establish immediately the whereabouts of Sra. Mayra Angelina Gutierrez Hernandez,  and guarantee her physical and psychological integrity in all circumstances;	  ii.	order her immediate liberation should it transpire that she is detained without valid charges or, if such charges exist, bring her before an independent and impartial tribunal and guarantee her procedural rights at all times;  iii.	carry out a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of the disappearance of Sra. Mayra Angelina Gutierrez Hernandez in order to identify those responsible, bring them to justice and impose upon them the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law;  iv.	in general act in accordance with the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International  Pacts and Covenants ratified by Guatemala.  Addresses  S.E. Alfonso Portillo, Presidente de la República de Guatemala, Palacio Nacional, Guatemala, Guatemala. Fax : + 502 2214537  ó  230-1508   Sr. Ministro de Gobernación, Ministerio de Gobernación, Palacio Nacional, 6 Calle y 7 Avenida, Guatemala, Guatemala. Fax : + 502 362 02 39  Sr. Procurador de Derechos Humanos, 12 Avenida 12-72, Zona 1, Guatemala, Guatemala. Fax : + 502 2 81734  Sr. Fiscal General de la Nación, Ministerio Público, 6 Av 3-11, Zona 4, Guatemala. Guatemala. Fax : + 502 331 4336  Sr. Canciller, Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores, Palacio Nacional, 6 Calle y 7 Avenida, Zona 1, Guatemala, Guatemala. Fax : + 502 251 8445,  E-mail : mint@mieno.gt  Comisión Presidencial de Derechos Humanos (Copredeh),  E-mail:copredeh@guate.net  The Guatemalan Embassy and Diplomatic Representation in your respective countries.   Geneva, 18th April  2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code number of this appeal in your reply. 