Saudi Arabia:  Arbitrary arrest and incommunicado detention of prominent women human rights defenders Samar Badawi and Nassima Al-Sadah
August 14, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Saudi Arabia / 2018 / AugustSaudi Arabia: Arbitrary arrest and incommunicado detention of prominent women human rights defenders Samar Badawi and Nassima Al-SadahURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORYSAU 005 / 0818 / OBS 103Arbitrary detention /Judicial harassment / Incommunicado detentionSaudi ArabiaAugust 14, 2018The
 Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership
 of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests 
your urgent intervention in the following situation in  Saudi Arabia.Description of the situation:The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the arbitrary arrest and incommunicado detention of Ms. Samar Badawi[1] and Ms. Nassima Al-Sadah [2], two prominent women human rights defenders[3]. According
 to the information received, on July 30, 2018, security forces arrested
 Ms. Samar Badawi and Ms. Nassima Al-Sadah. No information is available 
about neither the circumstances nor the reasons of their arrests. The 
two human rights defenders are currently held in an unknown location and
 no information has been provided on their whereabouts and conditions of
 detention.The
 Observatory recalls that over the past years, Ms. Samar Badawi has been
 repeatedly harassed, interrogated and arrested by the authorities for 
her human rights activities. Prior to her arrest, Ms. Samar Badawi 
appeared before the Bureau of Investigation and Prosecution, on February
 15, 2017, regarding previous issues related to her human rights and 
civil activities, including women’s campaign against male guardians. On 
January 12, 2016, she was arrested by the Criminal Investigation 
Authority of Jeddah without any reason, and released on bail the next 
day. On December 2, 2014, while on her way to participate to the 16th
 European Union NGOs Forum on Human Rights in Brussels, Belgium, she was
 informed by a staff from the airport that she was under a travel ban, 
without any reason given or prior investigation.The
 Observatory condems in the strongest terms the arbitrary arrest and 
incommunicado detention of Ms. Samar Badawi and Ms. Nassima Al-Sadah and
 urges the Saudi authorities to immediately disclose their whereabouts 
as well as to insure unhindered access to their families and lawyers.The
 Observatory further recalls that ahead of the official lift of the 
driving ban the Saudi authorities launched a crackdown on human rights 
defenders - and especially women human rights defenders[4]- in the country. As of publication of this Urgent Appeal, Ms. Hatoon Al-Fassi, Ms.  Nouf Abdulaziz, Ms. Mayya Al-Zahrani, Ms. Eman al-Nafjan , Ms. Aziza al-Youssef, Ms. Loujain al-Hathloul, Mr.  Mohammed al-Rabiah, Mr. Mohamed al-Bejadi, Mr. Abdulaziz Al-Mesha’aland Mr. Ibrahim al-Mudaimeegh
 remain detained. While pro-governmental media outlets reported that 
they have been arrested under vague accusations of “suspicious contacts 
with foreign entities” and “financial support to enemies overseas”, no 
formal charges have yet been reportedly pressed against them. Moreover, 
they are reportedly all detained in solitary confinement, without access
 to their lawyers and they could only speak with their families once or 
twice since their arrests.The 
Observatory urges the Saudi authorities to release the above-mentioned 
human rights defenders immediately and unconditionally, and to put an 
end to all acts of harassment, including judicial, against them as well 
as all human rights defenders in Saudi Arabia as this wave of arrests 
and arbitrary detentions only seems to aim at sanctioning peaceful and 
legitimate human rights activities, in particular in defence of women’s 
human rights.Actions requested: Please write to the authorities in Saudi Arabia, urging them to:i.     
 Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
 of Ms. Samar Badawi, Ms. Nassima Al-Sadah, Ms. Hatoon Al Fassi, Ms. 
Nouf Abdulaziz, Ms. Mayya Al-Zahrani, Ms. Eman al-Nafjan, Ms. Aziza 
al-Youssef, Ms. Loujain al-Hathloul, Mr. Mohammed al-Rabiah, Mr. Mohamed
 al-Bejadi, Mr. Abdulaziz Al-Mesha’al and Mr. Ibrahim al-Mudaimeegh as 
well as of all detained human rights defenders in Saudi Arabia;ii.     Immediately disclose Ms. Samar Badawi and Ms. Nassima Al-Sadah whereabouts;iii.   Ensure all detained human rights defenders have unhindered access to their family and lawyers;iv.   
 Immediately and unconditionally release Ms. Samar Badawi, Ms. Nassima 
Al-Sadah, Ms. Hatoon Al Fassi. Ms. Nouf Abdulaziz, Ms. Mayya Al-Zahrani,
 Ms. Eman al-Nafjan, Ms. Aziza al-Youssef, Ms. Loujain al-Hathloul, 
Mr. Mohammed al-Rabiah, Mr. Mohamed al-Bejadi, Mr. Abdulaziz Al-Mesha’al
 and Mr. Ibrahim al-Mudaimeegh and all detained human rights defenders 
in Saudi Arabia, as their detention is arbitrary since it only aims at 
punishing them for their legitimate human rights activities;v.    
 Put an end to all forms of harassment, including at the judicial level,
 against Ms. Samar Badawi, Ms. Nassima Al-Sadah, Ms. Hatoon Al Fassi, 
Ms. Nouf Abdulaziz, Ms. Mayya Al-Zahrani, Ms. Eman al-Nafjan, Ms. Aziza 
al-Youssef, Ms. Loujain al-Hathloul, Mr. Mohammed al-Rabiah, Mr. Mohamed
 al-Bejadi, Mr. Abdulaziz Al-Mesha’al and Mr. Ibrahim al-Mudaimeegh and 
all human rights defenders in the country so they are able to carry out 
their work without unjustified hindrance and fear of reprisal;vi.   
 Comply in all circumstances with all the provisions of the United 
Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular its 
Articles 1, 6(c) and 12.2;vii. 
 More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human 
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human 
rights standards and instruments.Addresses:•
 His Majesty, King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, King of Saudi Arabia 
and Custodian of the two Holy Mosques, Fax: (via Ministry of the 
Interior) +966 11 403 3125; Email: info@moi.gov.sa; Twitter: @KingSalman•
 His Excellency, Mohammad Bin Salman Al Saud, Crown Prince of Saudi 
Arabia, Fax: (via Ministry of the Interior) +966 11 403 3125; Email: info@moi.gov.sa• H.E. Waleed bin Mohammad Al Samaani, Minister of Justice, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Fax: + 966 11 405 7777; Email: info@moj.gov.sa•
 His Royal Highness Prince Abdulaziz Bin Saud Bin Naif Bin Abdulaziz, 
Minister of Interior, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Fax: + 966 11 401 1111 / +
 966 11 401 1944 / + 966 11 403 1125; Email: info@moi.gov.sa• H.E. Adel bin Ahmed El Jubeir, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax: + 966 11 403 0645 ; Email: info@mofa.gov.sa
 • H.E. Abdulaziz Alwasil, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Kingdom 
of Saudi Arabia to the United Nations Office in Geneva, Switzerland. 
Fax: +41 22 758 00 00. Email: saudiamission@bluewin.ch • H.E. Abdulrahman bin Soliman Al-Ahmed, Ambassador, Embassy of Saudi Arabia in Brussels, Belgium. Fax: +32 2 6468538. Email: beemb@mofa.gov.saPlease
 also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Saudi Arabia in 
your respective country as well as to the EU diplomatic missions or 
embassies in Saudi Arabia.***Paris-Geneva, August 14, 2018Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.The
 Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the 
Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation 
Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to intervene 
to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights 
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of  ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:·          E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org·          Tel and fax FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80·          Tel and fax OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29[1]
                 Ms. Samar Badawi defends the right of Saudi women to 
vote, drive and achieve social justice. On March 8, 2012, she received 
the International Women of Courage Award for her lawsuit against the 
Government demanding the right for women to vote. She’s the sister of 
the blogger Raif Badawi [1], sentenced on June 7, 
2015 to 1,000 lashes and 10 years of imprisonment for “insulting Islam 
and religious authorities” after the creation of his website Free Saudi 
Liberals[2]
                 Ms. Nassima Al-Sadah is a co-founding member of 
Al-Adalah Center for Human Rights, a NGO which was denied the permit to 
work in the country. In recent years, she was involved in women’s 
driving campaign and summoned various times due to her legitimate and 
peaceful human rights work [2]. She ran for the 
2015 municipal elections -the first open to women- in Qatif, but her 
candidacy was eventually rejected by the regime.[3]           For more information, see Observatory Report, Saudi Arabia: Condemned to silence: the situation of women human rights defenders, January 2018:  https://www.fidh.org/en/issues/human-rights-defenders/condemned-to-silence-the-situation-of-women-human-rights-defenders-in[4] https://www.fidh.org/en/issues/human-rights-defenders/crackdown-on-saudi-women-human-rights-defenders-sets-off-alarms-over 