Kazakhstan:  Joint Press Release: Freedom of assembly on trial: Proceedings against two human rights defenders to begin tomorrow
October 11, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kazakhstan / 2016 / OctoberKazakhstan: Joint Press Release: Freedom of assembly on trial: Proceedings against two human rights defenders to begin tomorrowKazakhstan_2016.10.11_Joint_PR2 pages / 286 KB​


 JOINT PRESS
RELEASE

 
KAZAKHSTAN:
Freedom of assembly on trial: Proceedings against two human rights defenders to
begin tomorrow
 
Geneva-Paris-Brussels-Almaty, 11
October 2016. The day before the trial against human rights defenders Max
Bokayev and Talgat Ayan begins in Atyrau (Kazakhstan), national and
international human rights organisations are calling for the proceedings to be
conducted in full compliance with international due process and fair trial
standards. These organisations will monitor the trial, including in the
framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
(OMCT-FIDH partnership) and the Civic Solidarity Platform (CSP) – a network of
over 80 human rights NGOs from across Europe, the former Soviet Union and North
America. 
 
The
judicial harassment and the arbitrary detention of Max Bokayev, a prominent
civil society activist who heads the NGO “Arlan”, and Talgat Ayan, a lawyer and
activist, have been ongoing since 17 May 2016. On that day, they were both
arrested in Atyrau in retaliation for their crucial role in the peaceful
protests against controversial amendments to Kazakhstan’s Land Code that took
place in Kazakhstan in April and May, as well as their critical statements on
this issue on social media platforms. In response to the peaceful land reform
protests, the Kazakhstani authorities adopted a predominantly repressive
approach including by detaining well-known civic activists and civil society
leaders, as well as by refusing to grant authorisation for peaceful rallies.
                 
“The criminal cases against Max
Bokayev and Talgat Ayan appear to be aimed at punishing them because of their
criticism of the Land Code reform and at sending a chilling message to civil
society in the country. We urge the Kazakhstani authorities to ensure that the
proceedings are carried out in full compliance with the right to a fair trial,
as guaranteed by international law and to acquit the two defenders”,
the five organisations declared.
                   
The
trial against Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayan will begin at Atyrau’s
City Court No. 2 at 10.30 am on 12 October 2016. The two human rights
defenders are facing charges for of “institution inciting of social discord”
(Criminal Code Article 174), “dissemination of knowingly false information” (Article
274) and “violation of the procedure of organisation and holding of meetings,
rallies, pickets, street processions and demonstrations” (Article 400) and face
imprisonment for a term of up to ten years. Both were remanded to pre-trial
detention in spite of requests for house arrest for medical reason. Max Bokayev
suffers from chronic hepatitis C and needs constant medical care.
 
“Our organisations will have trial
observers monitoring this high-profile and precedent-setting trial where not
only two human rights defenders, but the very right to peaceful protest in
Kazakhstan is on trial. Moreover, we have received particularly worrying
reports about attempts of intimidation of local trial observers and we
therefore call on the government of Kazakhstan to fully respect the principle
of transparency and publicity of judicial proceedings by ensuring unhindered access
for all national and international observers”, the five
organisations said.  
             
Signatories:
·      
OMCT and FIDH in the framework of
their partnership, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European
Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil
society. OMCT is member of the CSP.
·      
International Partnership for Human Rights (IPHR), in
the framework of the CSP.
·      
Kazakhstan International Bureau for Human Rights and
Rule of Law (KIBHR)
·      
Netherlands Helsinki Committee (NHC).
 
For more information, please
contact:
·      
OMCT: Miguel Martín / Delphine
Reculeau: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39
·      
FIDH: Audrey Couprie / Arthur Manet:
+ 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
·      
IPHR: Brigtte Dufour: + 32 473 36 38 91
·      
KIBHR: Yevgeniy
Zhovtis: + 7 727 225 4271
·      
NHC: Sofia Skrypnyk, +31 70 392 67
00 