Cameroon:  Judicial harassment of Esu community leaders, including nine members of EYDA
August  4, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cameroon / 2016 / AugustCameroon: Judicial harassment of Esu community leaders, including nine members of EYDA
New information
CMR 001 / 0716
/ OBS 056.1
Judicial
harassment /
Arbitrary
detention /
Release / Intimidation
Cameroon
August 4, 2016
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and
requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Cameroon.
New information:
The Observatory has
been informed by reliable sources about the judicial harassment of nine members
of the Esu Youths Development Association (EYDA)[1],
namely Messrs. Abue Philip Kpwe, Divine Biame, Cyprian Azong, Bernard Fuh, Redemption Godlove, Ephraim Kagha Mbong, Emmanuel Wung, Ivo Meh and Williams
Meh, as well as the continuing arbitrary detention of the first four. The
nine are community leaders opposing land-grabbing undertaken on the land
of the Esu community (North-West Cameroon) by Mr. Baba Ahmadou Danpullo[2],
a billionaire businessman, cattle rancher, tea plantation owner and a
member of the Central Committee of the ruling Cameroon People’s
Democratic Movement (CPDM) party. HRH Fon Kum Achuo II, chief of
the village[3], is also
facing charges due to two complaints filed on behalf of Mr. Baba Ahmadou
Danpullo.
According to the
information received, on July 26, 2016, the nine were expected to be brought
before the Examining Magistrate Oben Francis of
Bamenda High Court for a preliminary inquiry on trumped-up charges of
“depredation by band” (Section 236.1 of the Penal Code). The case is still
under preliminary inquiry, but if convicted, the nine face 10 to 20 years in
prison. Messrs. Abue Philip Kpwe, Divine Biame, Cyprian Azong and Bernard Fuh
are detained in Bamenda Central Prison since May 2016 (see background
information).
The court decided to
postpone the hearing for the third time until August 16, 2016, because the
magistrate was busy and also because only Mr. Kpwe was brought to court. Since
the arrest of several of the activists in April and May 2016, the trial had
been postponed two other times (July 5 and July 12), all at the request of the
court, allegedly due to the “late coming of Mr. Abue Phillip Kpwe and absence
of Mr. Divine Biame, Cyprian Azong and Bernard Fuh”. According to the
information received, the court did not prepare the warrant to bring the
detainees to the hearing.
On July 14, 2016,
State Prosecutor Justice Nchang Augustin Amongwa had ordered the release on
bail of Mr. Redemption Godlove for lack of jurisdiction ratione loci. However, according to the Penal Code he was supposed
to also release the remaining four activists still in jail and close the case
as the court has no jurisdiction to continue handling the matter. 
Furthermore, Mr. Robert Fon, lawyer of the nine Esu
community leaders, and Chris Mbunwe, a journalist of the Post
Newspaper in Bamenda, have been summoned to appear before the Examining
Magistrate on August 18, 2016 following a complaint for defamation filed
by Mr. Baba Ahmadou Danpullo on February 24, 2016, regarding an interview[4]. He
is claiming 100 000 000 FCFA (152 449 euros)
in damages. Once again, the hearing has been postponed three times (April 20,
25 and June 13).
More in general, the
Observatory strongly denounces several other acts of intimidation against the
Esu community leaders. 
On July 11, Mr. Sale Umaru, the ELBA Ranch manager, tried to bribe Mr.
Abu Philip Kpwe in order to make him sign a document accusing
HRH Fon Kum Achuo II of instructing
them to carry out the acts they are accused of. As a reward, he promised to
secure his release and give him 500 000 FCFA (762 euros). Mr. Kpwe refused to
sign the document.
On July 14, 2016, Mr. Danpullo through his ranch manager, filed a second
complaint against HRH Fon Kum Achuo II accusing him of “setting up an
armed group and importing guns from neighbouring Nigeria to come in an attack the military in
Esu and cattle belonging to Elba Ranch”. This complaint is still being
investigated by gendarmes.
On July 18, 2016, Messrs. Ivo Friday Kenah and Joseph Kelly Gham, two
villagers working for Elba Ranch, who testified in this case, confessed they
had been threatened and forced by Mr. Sale Umaru and Mr. Baba Ahmadou
Danpullo’s lawyer Sule Zakari to make false statements against the villagers and
the Fon HRH Fon Kum Achuo II. They have been interviewed by gendarmes and
provided written statements to this effect. Investigations are ongoing and this
complaint is not yet at the level of the courts.
Accordingly, the
Observatory calls upon the Cameroon authorities to release immediately and
unconditionally Messrs. Abue Philip
Kpwe, Divine Biame, Cyprian Azong and Bernard Fuh, and to put an end to
the ongoing harassment, including at judicial level, against them as well as
against Messrs. Redemption Godlove, Ephraim Kagha Mbong, Emmanuel Wung, Ivo
Meh, Williams Meh, HRH Fon Kum Achuo II, Robert Fon and Chris Mbunwe.
The Observatory further urges the Cameroon authorities to ensure that,
until charges are dropped, all the judicial proceedings are carried out in full
compliance with their right to a fair trial, as protected under international
law. 
Background
information:
In 2015, Mr. Baba
Ahmadou Danpullo attempted to establish a land certificate on the Esu
land. The Esu community leaders subsequently filed a case requesting Mr.
Danpullo to prove the land ownership. Instead of providing this proof, Mr.
Danpullo filed a case based on trumped-up charges of defamation against Barrister Robert Fon, the
Esu community lawyer, claiming 100 million FCFA (152 449 euros), alleging
that he had paid the Governor of the North-West and other officials 50
million FCFA (76 225 euros) to own the land. These developments are
part of the pattern of judicial harassment to deprive the Esu community of
legal counsel. Mr. Fon is also lawyer for the Mbororo community that
has been resisting abuses by Mr. Danpullo over several years[5].
On January 18, 2016, farmhouses belonging to Esu people were
reportedly burnt down by workers of the ELBA Ranch, belonging to Mr. Baba
Ahmadou Danpullo. The Esu filed a complaint to the Divisional Officer of Fungom
but have received no response to date. 
According to reports filed by Elba Ranch, in the night of
April 18, 2016, huts belonging to the workers of his “ELBA ranch” were burnt
down. However, it is reported that at that time around 50 gendarmes were
stationed in the area. A gendarmerie report of May 5 determined that no one
could be held responsible for the above-mentioned acts.
On April 22, 2016, Mr.
Redemption Godlove was arrested at his home on charges of “arson” and
“vandalism” and transferred to Bamenda Central Prison. His door was forced upon
by gendarmes from Elba Ranch. He was initially taken to Bamenda several
kilometers from Esu and locked up in secret. He was found following several
days of search by Esu community leaders and their lawyer.
On May 3, 2016, a two-room house under construction in Elba
Ranch was reportedly partly damaged. 
The same day, lawyers acting on behalf of Elba Ranch and Mr.
Baba Ahmadou Danpullo filed a complaint against the nine above-mentioned
community leaders and HRH Fon Kum Achuo II, for alleged burning down
of huts belonging to the workers of his “ELBA ranch”.
On May 9, 2016,
Messrs. Divine Biame, Cyprian Azong and Bernard Fuh were summoned to the gendarmerie legion of Bamenda and arrested under the
same charges. 
On May 25, 2016, Mr.
Abue Philip Kpwe was in turn arrested at a routine identity card checkpoint,
and placed in detention at Bamenda Central Prison on the same grounds.
On May 31, 2016, the Chambers of the Examining
Magistrate of the High Court of Mezam Division Holden at Bamenda ruled on a
Preliminary Objection filed by Barrister Robert Fon, on behalf of the nine
above-mentioned activists. 
Examining Magistrate Justice Francis Ndip Oben
relied upon Section 140 of the Penal Procedure Code[6]
to decline jurisdiction, and withdrew the remand warrant against Mr. Redemption
Godlove only, though the remand arrests should have been cancelled against the
other four[7],
and effectively ordering their release. 
In spite of this court
decision, the Bamenda Central Prison authorities kept the five human rights
defenders in detention, under the above-mentioned accusations. 
Actions
requested:
Please write to the authorities of Cameroon and
ask them to:
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of the nine members of EYDA, Messrs. HRH Fon Kum Achuo II, Robert Fon and Chris
Mbunwe and all human rights defenders in Cameroon;
ii. Release immediately and unconditionally Mr. Abue Philip Kpwe, Divine Biame, Cyprian Azong
and Bernard Fuh;
iii. Put an end to all acts of harassment - including at
judicial level - against the nine members of EYDA, HRH Fon Kum Achuo II, Robert Fon and Chris Mbunwe
and all human rights defenders in Cameroon;
iv. Conform in any circumstances with the provisions of the
United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9,
1998 by the UN General Assembly, in particular its Articles 1 and 12.2;
v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights instruments
ratified by Cameroon.
Addresses:
·      
Mr. Paul Biya, President of
the Republic of Cameroon, Fax +237 222 22 08 70
·      
H.E. Mr. Philémon Yang, Prime
Minister and Head of Government of Cameroon, Fax: +237 222 23 57 35 / + 237 222
23 57 65. Email: spm@spm.gov.cm 
·      
Mr. Laurent Esso, Minister of
Justice of Cameroon, Fax: + 237 222 23 00 05 / + 237 222 23 55 59
·      
Mr. René Emmanuel SADI,
Minister of Territorial Administration of Cameroon, Fax: + 237 22 22 37 35
·      
Dr. Chemuta Divine Banda,
President of the National Commission on Human Rights and Freedoms, Fax: +237
222 22 60 82, E-mail: cndhl@iccnet.cm / cdbanda26@yahoo.fr 
·      
H.E. Mr. Anatole Fabien Nkou, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Cameroon to the
United Nations Office in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 736 21 65, Email: mission.cameroun@bluewin.ch 
·      
H.E. Mr. Daniel Evina Abe'e, CameroonAmbassador to the European Union, Embassy of the Republic of
Cameroon, Brussels, Belgium. Fax: + 32 2 344 57 35; E-mail: ambassade.cameroun@skynet.be 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of Cameroon in your
respective countries.


[1]                 The EYDA aims at promoting and
protecting human rights, and notably the land rights of the Esu community.


[2]                 In 1986, Mr. Baba Ahmadou Danpullo
established two cattle ranches in the Boyo and Menchum divisions of the
North-West Region. He allegedly forced farming communities from their lands
without compensation, which made him the largest single private landowner in
the region. Since then, the landowner, who has close links with the
authorities, has been involved in land disputes with people peacefully
defending their land.


[3]                 HRH Kum Achuo II is the heir
chief of the Esu village. He is a traditional authority and any land title
application needs to be signed by him and two other notables. 


[4]                
See article in Cameroon Postline, Esu Does Not Want To Evict Danpulo
– Barrister Robert Fon, January 19, 2016: http://www.cameroonpostline.com/esu-does-not-want-to-evict-danpullo-barrister-robert-fon/   


[5]            Members of the Mbororo Social
and Cultural Development Association (MBOSCUDA), an organisation defending the
rights of Mbororo pastoralists in North-Western Cameroon since 1992, have faced
similar harassment over the past years after a complaint filed against them by
Mr. Baba Ahmadou Danpullo. See Observatory Urgent Appeal CMR 002/0613/OBS 049
of July 7, 2013 and Observatory Annual Report 2014.


[6]                 Section 140 states: (1) the
competent State Counsel shall be either: (a) That of the place of commission of
the offence; or (b) that of the place of residence of the suspect; or (c) that
of the place of arrest of the suspect. (2) When more than one State Counsel are
seized of the same matter, priority shall be given to the State Counsel in
whose jurisdiction the offence was committed.


[7]                 The remands
were issued on the same alleged grounds by the state counsel (procureur) of
Bamenda on the day of the arrest of each of the five EYDA members. However, as
the remand warrant was withdrawn for the first defendant, there can be no basis
to pursue the rest individually for the same alleged crime. 