Sri Lanka:  Sri Lanka: arbitrary detention, rape and torture of two women, one of whom is pregnant
April  9, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Sri Lanka / 2001 / AprilSri Lanka: Sri Lanka: arbitrary detention, rape and torture of two women, one of whom is pregnantVIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN LKA 090401.VAW  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sri Lanka.  Brief description of the situation:  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source of the alleged arbitrary detention, rape and torture of Mrs. Wijikala Nanthan, who is pregnant, and Mrs. Sivamani Sinnathamby Weerakon, by the Mannar Police's Counter Subversive Unit (CSU) in the third week of March, 2001.  According to the information received, Wijikala and Sivamani were arrested at around 11 pm by the CSU under the Prevention of Terrorism Act and the Emergency Regulations, with the CSU falsely accusing them of being trained members of the Liberation Tigers rebel group. Wijikala and her husband, and Sivamani and her six-year-old son were transported to the CSU's offices in Mannar. Here the women were raped and tortured until dawn by CSU officials. Both women were reportedly tortured until they agreed to falsely confess that they were trained military members of the Liberation Tiger who had brought bombs to Mannar. The women were forced to sign typed confessions to this effect, while still under arbitrary detention by the CSU several days after their arrest.   According to the reports, the CSU has also threatened the women not to give evidence against them in the case of a judicial investigation. The women were reportedly sentenced to a total of 14 days in judicial custody by Mannar district judge M.H.M Ajmeer, during which time they were allegedly repeatedly raped. Reports indicate that the CSU has previously arrested, raped and tortured women under the pretext of the Prevention of Terrorism Act and the Emergency Regulations.  OMCT is gravely concerned about these reports of torture, including rape, and arbitrary detention of women at the hands of the CSU. Previous similar cases in Sri Lanka have often gone unpunished.  Action requested:  Please write to the authorities of Sri Lanka urging them to :  i.	guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the family of both women and their families, and ensure them the right to adequate reparation;  ii.	guarantee an impartial and exhaustive inquiry into the arbitrary detention, rape and torture of Mrs. Wijikala Nanthan and Mrs. Sivamani Sinnathamby Weerakon, bring those responsible before a competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and administrative sanctions provided by law;  iii.	adopt immediate measures to put an end to these acts of torture and killings;   iv.	ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  Her Excellency President Chandrika B. Kumaratunga, Presidential Residence, Colombo 3, Sri Lanka Fax: 94 - 1 - 333 - 703   Mr. Mangala Samaraweera, Minister of Posts, Telecommunications and Media, Old CTO Building Lotus Rd, Colombo 1, Sri Lanka   Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, New Secretariat, Colombo 1, Sri Lanka  Hon. Ambassador, Permanent Mission and Consulate General of Sri Lanka, 56, Rue De Moillebeau,  5th Floor, 1 209, Geneva 19, Switzerland, Fax: (41-22) 734 9084, E-mail: mission.srilanka@itu.ch  Hon. High-Commissioner, The High Commission of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 13 Hyde Park Gardens London W2 2LU United Kingdom Fax: (0171) 262-7970, E-mail: lancom@easynet.co.uk  Geneva, 09 April 2001  Kindly inform the International Secretariat of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 