Russian Federation:  Follow-up of case RUS 040809: The whereabouts of Ms. Tatyana Kharlamova were located
December 14, 2009
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2009 / DecemberRussian Federation: Follow-up of case RUS 040809: The whereabouts of Ms. Tatyana Kharlamova were locatedCase RUS 040809.1 Follow-up of case RUS 040809 Whereabouts located/ Sentencing/ Release The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) has received new information on the following situation in the Russian Federation. New information The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Russian-Chechen Friendship Society (RCFS), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, that Ms. Tatyana Kharlamova, a Russian national born in 1989 whose whereabouts were unclear following her arrest on 30 May 2009, was eventually located, mid-August, in Khabarovsk pre-trial detention centre (SIZO 27/1). On 30 September 2009, Ms. Tatyana Kharlamova and Mr. Igor Schuka, a Belarus national born in 1987 who was arrested along with Ms. Tatyana Kharlamova, were sentenced to 10 months in prison by a court in Khabarovsk. As they had already served this term in pre-trial detention, they were released on the same day. Both are members of the banned National Bolshevik Party (NBP) in Moscow.  OMCT welcomes the fact that Ms. Tatyana Kharlamova was eventually located in apparent good health. OMCT was indeed gravely concerned for her safety as her whereabouts had remained unknown following her arrest and transfer by train in allegedly very poor conditions (see previous appeal RUS 040809).  Background information OMCT had earlier been informed that, on 30 May 2009, Ms. Tatyana Kharlamova, who was fourth months pregnant, and Mr. Igor Schuka were arrested on a bus in Smolensk region when they were on their way to Ukraine, in order to seek political asylum.  Both were taken to Khabarovsk by train (which is 9000 km away from Smolensk), during which Ms. Tatyana Kharlamova reportedly suffered a miscarriage, allegedly due to the bad conditions of transportation.  While Mr. Igor Schuka was detained in the Khabarovsk pre-trial detention centre, apparently in good health and assisted by the Belarus Embassy, the whereabouts of Ms. Tatyana Kharlamova could not be ascertained, raising fears for her safety.  On 1 October 2008, a group of NBP activists, including Ms. Tatyana Kharlamova and Mr. Igor Schuka had chained themselves to the doors of the Music Theater in Khabarovsk to protest against the decision by Russia to hand over to China three islands on Amur River. This protest occurred during the International Economic Forum, which plenary sessions were taking place in the Music Theater, in Khabarovsk.   Both Ms. Tatyana Kharlamova and Mr. Igor Schuka were arrested and charged with “inciting to hatred or animosity” (article 282 of the Russian Criminal Code), “participation in activities of an extremist group” (article 282 §2 of the Russian Criminal Code) and “insult of a state official” (article 319 of the Russian Criminal Code). On 1 April 2009, both were released but were requested not to leave the city. However, according to the same information, Ms. Tatyana Kharlamova and Mr. Igor Schuka decided, at the end of May 2009, to flee the city, allegedly because of constant police pressure and harassment.  Remarks OMCT wishes to thank all of the individuals and organisations that have taking action as a response to the urgent appeal. No further action is currently required on your part concerning this case.   Geneva, 14 December 2009 