Sudan:  Sudan: release of Al Shafe'e Altayeb Yousif, continuing detention of his brother
May 13, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2003 / MaySudan: Sudan: release of Al Shafe'e Altayeb Yousif, continuing detention of his brotherCase SDN 031202.5 Follow-up of Case SDN 031202 Release / Incommunicado detention / Torture / Risk of torture  Geneva, May 13th, 2003  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information regarding the following situation in Sudan.  New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudanese Organisation against Torture, a member of the OMCT network, of the release of Al Shafe'e Altayeb Yousif and the continuing detention of his brother, Lenin Altayeb Yousif, in Sudan.  According to the information received, Al Shafe'e Altayeb Yousif was released from prison on May 5th, 2003. He was able to confirm that his brother Lenin Altayeb Yousif had arrived at Kober prison on April 24th, 2003. The two brothers were not allowed to meet, but other detainees reportedly relayed information to Al Shafe'e, informing him that Lenin had been tortured.  OMCT is therefore gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Lenin Altayeb Yousif, particularly given reports that he is being detained incommunicado and has already been tortured during his detention. OMCT calls for his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges that are in line with international law, or, if such charges exist, urges the Sudanese authorities to ensure that he receives a prompt and fair trial, and that his procedural rights are guaranteed at all times. OMCT also calls on the Sudanese government to end its harassment of students and other persons involved in the student movement in Sudan.  Remarks  OMCT welcomes the release of Al Shafe'e Altayeb Yousif and wishes to take this opportunity to thank all individuals and institutions that intervened on his behalf.  Brief reminder of the situation  In the early hours of 29 November 2002, a group of armed security officers arrested Al Shafe'e Altayeb Yousif and two of his brothers, Khidir Altayeb Yousif and Hashim Altayeb Yousif, after raiding their house in Al Kalakla Algubba, Khartoum, allegedly in search of a fourth brother, Lenin Altayeb Yousif, who is a well-known student leader.   Members of the Security Forces told the family that the three men would be held until their elder brother Lenin Altayeb presented himself to security officers. Lenin Altayeb is a former student leader at Al Nilein University, and a well-known member of the Sudanese Students Democratic Front (SSDF). Lenin has been arrested on 3 previous occasions, the first of which was in September 1996, when he was arrested with 19 other student leaders of the SSDF and severely tortured.  Khidir Altayeb Yousif was released on December 16th, 2002, Hashim Altayeb Yousif was released on January 15th, 2003, and now Al Shafe'e Altayeb Yousif has been released on May 5th, 2003. The three brothers were reportedly tortured during their detention.   On April 24th, 2003, Lenin Altayeb Yousif, was arrested by the National Security Agency outside of the school where he teaches. Mr. Yousif was taken to an undisclosed location, and his family was unable to obtain information regarding his whereabouts and condition. Mr. Yousif reportedly suffers from asthma requiring regular medication and there are serious concerns for his health, as his family has confirmed that he was not carrying his medication at the time of his arrest. These arrests occur against a background of widespread arrests of students (see previous appeals for further details).   Action requested:  Please write to the authorities in Sudan:  i.	welcoming the decision to release Al Shafe’e Altayeb Yousif;  and urging them to:  ii.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Lenin Altayeb Yousif, including the provision of adequate medical attention as a matter of urgency; iii.	order his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges, or, if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times; iv.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events, notably the allegations of torture, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; v.	guarantee that adequate reparation is provided to all persons found to have been subjected to torture in relation with these events; vi.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses:  §	His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, President's Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: + 24911 783223  §	Mr. Ali Mohamed Osman Yassin, Minister of Justice and Attorney General, Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: +24911 788941   §	Mr. Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: +24911 779383   §	Mr. Yasir Sid Ahmed, Advisory Council for Human Rights, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan.  Fax: + 24911 779173  §	His Excellency Ambassador Mr Ibrahim Mirghani Ibrahim, Permanent Mission of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 335, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax : +4122 7312656.  E-mail: mission.sudan@ties.itu.int  Please also write to the embassies of Sudan in your respective country.  Geneva, May 13th, 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 