Saudi Arabia:  Joint Open Letter: A Closed letter from Human Rights Organisations to the Saudi leadership Sent on 16 July 2015 and no reply has been received as yet
September  1, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Saudi Arabia / 2015 / SeptemberSaudi Arabia: Joint Open Letter: A Closed letter from Human Rights Organisations to the Saudi leadership Sent on 16 July 2015 and no reply has been received as yet
His Majesty the Custodian of the Two
Holy Mosques, King Salman bin Abdul Aziz Al Saud, King of Saudi Arabia
His Royal Highness Prince Mohammed bin
Nayef bin Abdul Aziz, Crown Prince, Deputy Prime Minister and Interior Minister
His Royal Highness Prince Mohammed bin
Salman bin Abdul Aziz, Second Crown Prince, Second Deputy Prime Minister and
Defense Minister
 
01-September-2015 Your majesty and royal highnesses 
 
We are gravely concerned about the
worsening situation of human rights defenders in Saudi Arabia as
they continue to face severe risks for their peaceful activism. Many of
them are still in detention on fabricated charges where they are inadequately
protected from torture and other ill-treatment, and subjected to inhumane
conditions. The right to freedom of expression is violated, as they are banned
from freely expressing their opinions on the Internet or through other media,
and face threats, intimidation, arbitrary arrests, prosecutions and harassment
as a result. Both the cyber-crime and counter-terror laws, adopted in 2007 and
2014 respectively, are arbitrarily applied to target peaceful human rights
defenders. 
We,
the undersigned human rights organizations, are writing to ask you during this
holy month of Ramadan, that you release all the detained human rights defenders
and prisoners of conscience, including Walid Abu Al-Khair, Dr. Mohammed Al-Qahtani, Dr. Abdullah Al-Hamid, Dr. Abdulkarim Al-Khodr, Raif
Badawi, Mohammad Al-Bajadi, Fadel Al-Manasef, Fawzan
Al-Harbi, Sheikh Sulaiman Al-Rashudi, Issa Al-Nukheifi and
all of their colleagues. This move will constitute a positive step and reassure
the international community, as all of these activists have not committed any
offense whatsoever and they have simply exercised their right to peaceful and
legitimate work in the defense and promotion of human rights.
We are very concerned about the physical
and psychological integrity of these human rights defenders and prisoners of
conscience in the wake of the many documented reports of their ill-treatment
and lack of access to necessary health care. We consider that the situation of
detained human rights defenders in Saudi Arabia is inconsistent with the United
Nations provisions set forth in the "Standard Minimum Rules for the
Treatment of Prisoners."
This should also comprise the right for
local human rights organizations to work legally in a safe and enabling
environment without fear of reprisals and free from any form of intimidation
and harassment. This requires the abolition of all laws that unlawfully limit
or restrict freedom of expression through the traditional media or social media
networks. 
As noted above, the cybercrime and
counter-terrorism laws, in particular, have been applied in an arbitrary manner
to silence human rights defenders and to unlawfully restrict freedom of
expression. While we recognize the rights and duties of all states to fight
terrorism, we believe as human rights organizations that it is essential to
confront such threats in a manner which respects human rights and complies with
Saudi Arabia’s obligations under international law. That means that human
rights defenders must not be prevented or impeded from exercising their rights
and responsibilities to defend human rights. We fear that the absence of a safe
and enabling environment for the defense and promotion of human rights, and the
repression and imprisonment of human rights defenders, has contributed some to
resort to violence. We also strongly believe that a real national dialogue with
the entire spectrum of peaceful views in the Kingdom is the safest way to
accommodate and contain differences.
Your majesty, you mentioned in your
meeting with Saudi Arabian human rights bodies on 22 May 2015, that you are
working to "achieve justice, and to ensure freedom of expression, and to
address the causes of division and its reasons, and not to discriminate, as there
is no difference between a citizen and another, or between one region and
another, for sons of the nation are equal in rights
and duties." Unfortunately, these words have not yet reflected in
practice. We urge you today to ensure that the values and principles you have
clearly espoused and called for are upheld in reality.
Finally,
we call on you to guarantee in all circumstances that all human rights
defenders in Saudi Arabia are able to carry out their peaceful and legitimate
human rights activities without fear of reprisals and free of intimidation,
including judicial harassment. 
The
co-signed organisations:
1.      Amnesty International (AI)
2.     
Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies (CIHRS)
3.      CIVICUS World Alliance for Citizen
Participation
4.     
Front Line Defenders (FLD)
5.     
Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR)
6.     
Human Rights Watch (HRW)
7.      International  Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH) under the Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders
8.      Reporters without Borders (RSF)
9.      World Organization Against Torture (OMCT) under the Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights 