Egypt:  Hunting out Feminists in Egypt – Azza Soliman and Mozn Hassan Embody the State’s Refusal of Feminist Activism in both Private and Public Spheres
January 10, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Egypt / 2017 / JanuaryEgypt: Hunting out Feminists in Egypt – Azza Soliman and Mozn Hassan Embody the State’s Refusal of Feminist Activism in both Private and Public Spheres
​The
 Women Human Rights Defenders International Coalition (WHRDIC), of which
 OMCT is a member, is a resource and advocacy network supporting women 
human rights defenders worldwide. The targeting by the government of Azza Soliman
and Mozn Hassan also attempts to further destabilize other WHRDs dismantling
patriarchy and fighting for rights in Egypt. It attempts to deliberately
discourage women from dreaming and collectively taking action for just and
equal societies. Taking into account both Azza Soliman’s and Mozn Hassan’s
regional work, such attacks also attempt to hamper regional collaboration among
WHRDs. Needless to say, such attempts will inevitably fail, and feminist
movements and WHRDs in Egypt and the region will continue to thrive.
Recent
events in Egypt have made it clear that the Egyptian state seems determined to
close down the civic space of feminists – and indeed, others – who work on
critical issues such as violence against women (VAW) in both private and public
spheres. While civil society has been directly targeted by agents of the state,
including police and courts, women and feminist activists are very much under
fire. Egyptian feminists and women human rights defenders (WHRDs) Azza Soliman
and Mozn Hassan have had a taste of all the patriarchal weapons the state can
muster to stifle their activism, which are typical of the tools normally used
by both state (and sometimes non-state) actors against WHRDs under repressive
governments. Despite the pivotal work they conduct for combating VAW and other
human rights violations, and despite the support services they have been
providing survivors with for years, they are described as spies, persons who
“harm national security” and those who incite “irresponsible liberation” of
women. Both women are included in “Case 173” also known as the “NGO Foreign
Funding Case”. The former description references some of the charges used
against them –  which include life imprisonment. While that risk hangs
over their heads, they are banned from travel. Soliman’s assets and those of
her law firm have been frozen. Deliberations about freezing Hassan’s assets as
well as those of Nazra for Feminist Studies (an NGO where she is the Director)
have been underway, and a verdict is expected 11 January 2017. Freezing assets
of individuals generally strips them of their resources and the ability to
sustain themselves on a daily basis.
Azza
Soliman is a prominent Egyptian WHRD[1],
lawyer and feminist who has been working for more than 25 years on women’s
rights in the private sphere and their access to justice. Her work addresses
the fact that many women and people in marginalized groups in Egypt are
severely deprived from their basic rights in laws and practice. She works to
enhance accountability for VAW and was the first to propose a civil law
governing the right to divorce, inheritance and custody among other rights for
both Muslims and Christians, and the Nationality Law for Egyptian women married
to non-Egyptians. Also, Soliman worked on combating corruption, through
including women in political decision making processes and positions in public,
academia, and business sectors. She has also challenged the Egyptian government
in Egyptian courts through using the Convention on the Elimination of all Form
of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) and other international conventions.
Soliman was
the first to break the silence on various societal taboos such as incest,
martial rape, and human trafficking in women, in relation to marriage. In 1995,
she founded Center for Egyptian Women’s Legal Assistance (CEWLA) and is now the
head of its Board of Trustees. CEWLA is located in the slum area of Bulaq Al-Daqrour
and subsequently serves many of the most economically and politically
marginalized women in the Egyptian judicial system. Soliman is one of the
founders of the international Musawah movement, which develops progressive
interpretations in the Islamic Shar’ia law related to the family and women’s
rights. A consultant for various UN agencies in the Arab region, she is a board
member of Sisters In Islam which works to empower women for change in the Arab
region and is also an advisor for the Middle East and North Africa Women Human
Rights Defenders Coalition.
Mozn Hassan is a feminist and WHRD who founded Nazra
for Feminist Studies in 2005, and has documented human rights violations and
coordinated the response to the alarming number of sexual assaults on women
participating in public protests during and after the Egyptian revolution of
2011. Her work and that of Nazra ensured that survivors received medical,
psychological and legal support. Hassan and Nazra engaged in coalitions of
women’s groups that successfully lobbied for the inclusion of women’s rights in
Egypt’s 2014 Constitution and ensured the passage of amendments to the Egyptian
Penal Code to include sexual harassment and expand the definition of sexually
violent crimes. Believing that feminism and gender are political and social
issues affecting freedom and development in all societies, Hassan and Nazra
mentor young women in politics, including encouraging candidates for
parliamentary, municipal and union elections from across Egypt’s political
spectrum. Despite being targeted by the state, she is recognized globally for
her advocacy and role in feminist struggles.  She is a board member at
Global Fund for Women, and was a member of the International Planning Committee
for the Association for Women’s Rights in Development (AWID) 13th Forum, in
addition to being a Regional Consultant to the WHRD Coalition in the Middle
East and North Africa (MENA). Hassan received both the Charlotte Bunch Award
for Human Rights Defenders in 2013 and the Right Livelihood Award in 2016, the
latter of which is commonly known as the “Alternative Nobel Prize”.
Soliman and
Hassan have been targeted in the current context of escalated attacks on civil
society and human rights organizations in Egypt. The tactics used by the
government against them are paralleled by those used against others: there is
currently a closure order issued, for the renowned El Nadeem Center for the
Treatment and Rehabilitation of Victims of Violence and Torture, and the
re-opening of the case no. 173 for 2011 known as the “NGO Foreign
Funding Case”,
which includes the assets freeze of Founder and Executive Director of the Cairo
Institute for Human Rights Studies (CIHRS), his family and others. Moreover, 3
Nazra for Feminist Studies staff members were officially summoned before the
investigative judge on 22 March 2016 followed by that of Hassan on 29 March
2016. A travel ban has been put in place for Mohamed Zaree, the Egypt Office
Director of CIHRS.
The
imposition of a travel ban on Soliman, along with the freeze of her personal assets and
those of her private law firm came without an official verdict, which is also
alarming, if not illegal. These were preceded by her arrest on 7 December 2016
and her release through bail amounting to EGP 20,000 (which currently equates
to 1,112.32 USD- bearing the float of the Egyptian Pound), which is a high
amount and was never used in other recent incidents. Furthermore, a request was
made by the investigative judge to freeze the
assets of Hassan and that of Nazra for Feminist Studies. This crackdown is negatively
crowned with the parliament’s passing on 20 November 2016 of an unprecedented NGO Law that would completely annihilate
civil society in Egypt[2].
Punishing
two respected feminist advocates  with being potentially sentenced to life
imprisonment is baffling both because of their human rights work, and because
these threats are orchestrated by a government that seemingly prioritizes
women’s human rights, including through proudly asserting its strong intention
to combat VAW. This issue was highlighted by feminists during the time of the
mob-sexual assaults and gang rapes between 2012 and 2014, when the government,
political parties and other similar groups remained notably silent.
The
targeting by the government of Azza Soliman and Mozn Hassan also attempts to
further destabilize other WHRDs dismantling patriarchy and fighting for rights
in Egypt. It attempts to deliberately discourage women from dreaming and
collectively taking action for just and equal societies. Taking into account
both Azza Soliman’s and Mozn Hassan’s regional work, such attacks also attempt
to hamper regional collaboration among WHRDs[3].
Needless to say, such attempts will inevitably fail, and feminist movements and
WHRDs in Egypt and the region will continue to thrive. Also, it is important to
note that the escalation in the measures taken against Soliman and Hassan is
more severe than that directed to other human rights defenders in the same case
(Case 173), likely signifying an intensity due to the fact that they are women
and feminists.
In fact,
the vision and advocacy of these two feminists, along with others representing
different generations of the Egyptian feminist movement paved the way for
legislation and measures to be taken towards this issue. However, it is clear
that both Soliman and Hassan are seen by the government to have “crossed the
line” since they defy the patriarchal norms that are enshrined and upheld by
the state and society. These women human rights defenders speak loudly and
clearly about VAW taking place in homes, perpetrated by family members, at the
hands of state actors, and in the streets- streets that in the eyes of the
state, fall within the territory of the state, and subsequently, have stripped
the state from its long coercion of assuming the role of “women’s protection”
on their own terms, while feminists challenge and defy patriarchy, change
attitudes and societies – hence the “irresponsible liberation”, of which Hassan
is accused.
The
Egyptian state cannot be allowed to stifle Hassan and Soliman’s activism. The
government cannot co-opt the feminist movement as many say it did in the 1950s.
If it were to succeed, the discourse on women’s human rights and women’s rights
to bodily integrity will  be a conservative one that ensures no rights
whatsoever for women in a country with a defective civic space, and silence on
these issues will prevail, where the state supported media perfectly tailored a
discourse, or rather a smear campaign, that enables non-state actors to conduct
a witch hunt for feminists of the like of Soliman and Hassan.
In fact,
feminist activism, especially when it addresses issues as sensitive as those
courageously tackled by Soliman and Hassan, is not only targeted by the state,
but also by large segments of society. Working on sexual violence in the public
and private spheres, as well as on political rights of women, or reforming the
personal status law, does not merely challenge the state. In addition, because
patriarchy is not only present at the structural state level, and because it is
rather a very diffuse form of power, this kind of work is also challenged and
negated by many other societal actors, including people in family and community
structures, school systems, in law, in media and in religious institutions, to
name just a few. Hence, state targeting of feminists is a way of stigmatizing
them in their societies in ways that appeal to those who would rather believe
fabricated and  trumped-up charges than truly rethink the patriarchal
norms that feminists challenge. This way in which feminists remain stuck
between and antagonized by both state and other societal actors,supports the
idea that WHRDs face a range of different violations and challenges because of
sexism and misogyny, and different and additional tools of targeting and
stigmatization than male human rights defenders do.
These roles
of gender-related oppression must be explored, particularly in cases such as
those of Hassan and Soliman. Mozn Hassan and Azza Soliman have been engaging in
extraordinary defense of rights for decades. They must not continue to be
punished by the Egyptian government for this feminist work, and they must not
be used as high profile “sacrificial lambs” in state efforts to close down
civil society organizing.
—–
[1]Please read Mozn Hassan’s intergenerational feminist analysis for Azza
Soliman’s feminist work in Egypt on
Open
Democracy  published on December 1st, 2016, https://www.opendemocracy.net/arab-
awakening/mozn-hassan/what-has-azza-done-azza-soliman-unique-feminist-at-risk
[2] Please read: “Egypt: A Letter and legal memorandum to the
President, demanding the repeal of the NGO Law”: http://www.cihrs.org/?p=19328&lang=en
[3]Please read Zeina al Gazhar on regional collaboration among WHRDs in the
MENA on Open Democracy published on 29 November 2016 https://www.opendemocracy.net/zeina-al-aghar/on-international-day-for-women-human-rights-defenders-building-bridges-of-solidarity-
On regional
dimensions of attacks targeting WHRDs in Egypt please read Semanur Karaman and
Sara Brandt on Open Democracy published on 12 July 2016
https://www.opendemocracy.net/arab-awakening/semanur-karaman-sara-brandt/egypt-targeting-mozn-harmful-to-mena-regional-gender-just 