Thailand:  International Appeal to Thai Pineapple Industry Association to urge Natural Fruit to drop cases against labour rights defender Andy Hall
August  8, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2014 / AugustThailand: International Appeal to Thai Pineapple Industry Association to urge Natural Fruit to drop cases against labour rights defender Andy HallThailand_Joint Letter to TPIA members_Andy Hall9 pages / 924 KB

August 8, 2014 
 
RE: TPIA action requested in case of Natural Fruit v.
Andy Hall 
 
note: An unofficial
Thai translation of this letter is attached and available at:
http://business-humanrights.org/en/letter-to-thai-pineapple-industry-association-on-andy-hall-thai
 
 
Dear TPIA Member, 
 
We write to you
today to express deep concern with recent actions by a fellow member of the
Thai Pineapple Industry Association (TPIA), Natural Fruit Co. Ltd., and Natural
Fruit’s CEO and TPIA President, Wirat Piyapornpaiboon. The case Natural Fruit
has brought against labor rights researcher, Mr. Andy Hall, has received international media attention and has been
described as an “international embarrassment” to Thailand. Natural Fruit’s
apparent effort to silence human rights defenders tarnishes the reputation of
the TPIA and the entire Thai pineapple export industry. We ask that you take
immediate action within the TPIA to urge that Natural Fruit drop its case
against Andy Hall and cooperate with worker groups and NGOs to resolve alleged
labor rights violations at its factories. If Natural Fruit continues on its
current course, TPIA members should act together to preserve the integrity of
the organization by sanctioning Natural Fruit, up to and including removal of
Mr. Wirat Piyapornpaiboon as TPIA president and revocation of Natural Fruit’s
membership in TPIA. 
 
Natural Fruit filed
its first criminal defamation charge against Mr. Hall on February 4, 2013,
after he contributed to a report by the Finnish NGO Finnwatch that alleged
serious labor rights abuses at the company’s factory in Prachuap Khiri Khan
province. The report, Cheap has a High Price, gathered worker interviews
to document violations including child labor, underpayment of wages, confiscation
of migrant workers’ travel and work documents, and failure to provide legally
mandated paid sick days, holidays and leave. Natural Fruit has continued to
file cases against Mr. Hall, now totaling three criminal defamation charges,
one civil defamation action and two criminal charges under the Computer Crimes
Act. If found guilty of all the charges, Mr. Hall faces up to seven years in
prison on each count and about $9.5 million in damages. The trial is scheduled
to begin in September 2014. 
 
Both before and
after publication, Finnwatch and Mr. Hall made overtures to Natural Fruit to
request comments and work together to resolve the issues alleged in the report.
If, as Natural Fruit claims, the allegations are false, it should be
straightforward for the company to clear up any issue and demonstrate that it
is adhering to labor laws. By refusing to work with civil society and instead
launching an aggressive legal battle against Mr. Hall, Natural Fruit is sending
a message that it would rather intimidate critics and silence those who
advocate on behalf of migrant workers than engage in genuine dialogue about
conditions in its factories. 
 
We would hope
instead that Natural Fruit would pursue the matter in accordance with the
United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, which
calls upon businesses to “address adverse human rights impacts with which they
are involved” as a foundational principle. 
 
TPIA should not
remain silent while its President’s company undertakes punitive, unjust actions
against Andy Hall. Already, internet searches for the Thai Pineapple Industry
Association bring more results condemning Natural Fruit for its actions than
positive stories of your work promoting the Thai pineapple industry. This
negative publicity hinders TPIA’s ability to carry out its stated mission, and
the trial has not yet even begun. Once the trial has begun, current and
potential buyers may weigh the risks of becoming associated with the case and
its connection with the TPIA and its member companies. 
 
To protect its
members and the industry it represents, we believe that TPIA must take
immediate action. We hope that you will work with other members of the TPIA to
encourage Natural Fruit to drop the charges against Mr. Hall and engage
constructively with civil society to demonstrate that all its members are in
compliance with labor laws. If Natural Fruit refuses, we ask that the TPIA
revoke Natural Fruit’s membership and remove Mr. Piyapornpaiboon as TPIA
president. 
 
We hope you will
give immediate attention to this issue and look forward to a response outlining
your plans regarding Natural Fruit. We would also welcome the opportunity to
discuss this matter with you further. 
 
Sincerely,
 
(See attached for
the full list of signatories) 