Joint Open Letter: GEORGIA/AZERBAIJAN: Abduction of journalist Afgan Mukhtarli
June  7, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2017 / JuneJoint Open Letter: GEORGIA/AZERBAIJAN: Abduction of journalist Afgan Mukhtarli

Att.: Prime
Minister of Georgia, Mr. Giorgi Krvirikashvili 
Parliament of
Georgia 
26, Abashidze
Street
Kutaisi,
Georgia, 4600
 
6 June 2017
 
 
Dear Mr. Krvirikashvili,
 
We write to
express our deepest concern about the abduction of Afgan Mukhtarli, an exiled
Azerbaijani journalist, on 29 May in Tbilisi. He went missing after leaving his
colleagues in the evening, before resurfacing the following day in Baku in the
custody of Azerbaijan’s state border agency. 
 
Mukhtarli reports
that he was forced into a car near his home, tied up and beaten. His abductors
put a bag over his head and 10,000 euros were stuffed into his pockets while
crossing the Azerbaijani border. His lawyer Elchin Sadygov, who managed to
visit him in detention, confirmed that he bore the marks of blows to his face
and that he may have had one of his ribs broken. On 31 May, a court in Baku
sentenced him to a three months’ pre-trial detention while he is now being
charged with smuggling, illegal border crossing and violence against police
authority.
 
This disturbing
development does not only expose Afgan Mukhtarli to the possibility of torture
and a long prison sentence, but also sets a worrying precedent, threatening the
security of dozens of other Azerbaijanis living in exile in Georgia. Numerous
independent journalists, human rights defenders and other civil society
activists fled Azerbaijan in recent years to escape repression, but they are
increasingly becoming targets of harassment and persecutions abroad. They were
hoping to find a safe haven in Georgia, but must now live with the constant
fear of being illegally brought back to their country of origin. 
 
Afgan
Mukhtarli’s abduction and illegal deportation to his country while in process
of applying for asylum in Georgia is a clear violation of international law. The
prohibition of torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment enshrined
in Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights, to which Georgia is a
state party, clearly implies an obligation for each country not to expel,
extradite or deport an individual to a state, where he or she faces a real risk
of being subjected to this type of treatment. It is therefore Georgia’s
responsibility to guarantee the safety of Azerbaijanis living in its territory
and to prevent any forced return to their country. 
 
Afgan
Mukhtarli’s abduction is a black stain on Georgia’s reputation as a leader in
upholding human rights standards in the Caucasus region. The Azerbaijani
authorities are engaged in a relentless war against their remaining critics. The
Council of Europe’s Commissioner for Human Rights, Nils Muiznieks, stated in
May 2017: “The situation in Azerbaijan
continues to worry me. Since 2015, I have intervened before the European Court
of Human Rights in seven cases, which are in my view emblematic of the human
rights problems of the country: limitations to freedom of expression, shrinking
space for NGOs, and official harassment of human rights defenders and their
lawyers. While the applicants of the cases I intervened in are no longer in
prison, we should not forget all the others who are still detained on charges
which defy credibility, often after having expressed critical views against the
authorities.”[1]
As the neighbour of such a repressive state, Georgia has a moral duty to
maintain its historical role of welcoming Azerbaijani dissidents. 
 
We welcome the
opening of an investigation into Afgan Mukhtarli’s “illegal abduction”. We hope
that it will fully shed light on the abductors’ identities and clarify the
potential role of the Georgian authorities in what happened. A clear message
needs to be sent regarding that illegal actions of a neighbouring state on
Georgian territory will not be accepted, and that any public servant implicated
in such grave violations of international law will be held accountable.  
 
Georgia has co-sponsored all recent United Nations resolutions on human
rights defenders. Most recently, Georgia was amongst the States expressing
grave concern at the United Nations Human Rights Council – of which Georgia is
a member – “that the practice of enforced disappearance is often used to
repress and intimidate human rights defenders” (resolution 34/5 adopted on 23 March 2017 by the Human Rights
Council, with Georgia voting in favour). The
credibility of Georgia’s commitment to the protection of fundamental rights and
freedoms is hence at stake. 
 
We thank you in
advance for the attention you give to our request.
 
Sincerely,
 
-       
Canadian Journalists for Free
Expression
-       
CEE Bankwatch Network
-       
Civil Rights Defenders
-       
Committee to Protect
Journalists
-       
Crude Accountability
-       
English PEN
-       
FIDH, within the framework of
the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
-       
Freedom Now
-       
Human Rights First
-       
Human Rights House Foundation
-       
Human Rights Watch
-       
Index on Censorship
-       
IFEX
-       
International Media Support
-       
International Partnership for
Human Rights
-       
Institute for War and Peace
Reporting
-       
Netherlands Helsinki Committee
-       
Norwegian Helsinki Committee
-       
PEN America
-       
PEN International
-       
People in Need
-       
Reporters Without Borders (RSF)
-       
World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders



[1] http://www.coe.int/en/web/commissioner/-/azerbaijan-should-release-all-persons-detained-because-of-their-views-expressed-or-legitimate-civic-activity?desktop=true 