Belarus:  Open Letter to the Prime Minister of Lithuania: Arbitrary detention of Mr. Ales Bialatski
August 11, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Belarus / 2011 / AugustBelarus: Open Letter to the Prime Minister of Lithuania: Arbitrary detention of Mr. Ales Bialatski

OPEN LETTER - THE 
OBSERVATORY
 
Open Letter to 
Mr. Andrius 
Kubilius
Prime Minister of 
Lithuania
 

Paris-Geneva, August 11, 2011
 
 
Re: Arbitrary detention of Mr. Ales Bialatski, President of the Human 
Rights Centre "Viasna" and FIDH Vice-President, following the transfer of 
Lithuanian bank account details by the Lithuanian Ministry of 
Justice
 
 
Your Excellency,
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), condemns the ongoing arbitrary detention of 
Mr. Ales Bialatski, FIDH Vice-President and President of the Belarusian 
Human Rights Centre "Viasna".
 
Mr. Ales Bialatski was arrested on August 4, 2011 by the police 
representative of the Department of Financial Investigations. On the same day, a 
search was carried out in his house. On August 5, 2011, Mr. Bialatski was 
remanded in prison for ten days in the detention centre of the Interior 
Ministry, which is known for its harsh conditions of detention and where he 
remained detained as of August 10, 2011.
 
This detention is related to a criminal case opened against Mr. 
Bialatski for supposed "tax evasion under Article 243, part 2, of the Criminal 
Code of the Republic of Belarus (“concealment of profits on an especially large 
scale”), which provides for up to seven years' imprisonment with confiscation of 
property.
 
As you know, the Belarusian authorities were able to open this case 
on the basis of information related to Mr. Bialatski's bank account, registered 
at DnB NORDs bank in Vilnius, Lithuania. The Belarusian tax authorities 
interpreted the amount on the account of Mr. Bialatski's as his personal income 
and accused him of concealing it. 
 
In reality, this money, which was transferred by international 
organisations, was by no means used as personal funds but to finance the 
legitimate human rights activities of the HRC "Viasna", such as assistance 
provided to victims of the political repression in the post-electoral context. 
It is indeed only because Belarusian independent human rights organisations, 
including the HRC "Viasna", are confronted with systematic refusals of 
registration, and because Article 193.1 of the Criminal Code of Belarus 
criminalises activities “as part of an unregistered organisations”, that the 
funds dedicated to the human rights activities of the HRC "Viasna" had to be 
transferred on this Lithuanian bank account.
 
In Belarus, the legitimate use of these funds is in reality made 
illegitimate by repressive laws aiming to silence civil society activities. The 
information disclosed by the Lithuanian Ministry of Justice to the Belarusian 
authorities could therefore lead to further judicial harassment against Mr. 
Bialatski.
 
The Observatory deplores the fact that this case could be brought 
against FIDH Vice-President and HRC "Viasna" President on the basis of 
information that was provided by the Lithuanian Ministry of Justice to the 
Belarusian authorities.
 
We are appalled by the fact that the Ministry of Justice of 
Lithuania, a member-State of the European Union (EU), did not consider the 
safety of Mr. Bialiatski before facilitating the transfer of information of his 
Lithuanian bank account to the authorities of Belarus.
 
While taking note of the recent announcement by your Ministry of 
Justice of the suspension of its legal assistance to Belarus in this case, the 
Observatory strongly regrets that by transferring this data, Lithuania directly 
put a Belarusian human rights defender at risk, in breach of the EU Guidelines 
on Human Rights Defenders, which provide on the contrary that the aim of the EU 
and its member-States is - inter alia - to "effectively work towards the 
promotion and protection of human rights defenders in third 
countries".
 
Considering the responsibility of the Republic of Lithuania in these 
tragic developments, the Observatory:
 
-    is asking you which steps and demarches have been taken by your 
Government to contribute to the unconditional release of Mr. Bialatski, whose 
arbitrary detention manifestly aims at sanctioning his human rights 
activities;
 
-        is calling on you to urgently put in place safeguards to prevent 
similar incidents in the future, and to ensure the safety of human rights 
defenders both in Lithuania and in third countries.
 
The Observatory recalls that Mr. Bialatski has always acted in 
accordance with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, which state 
that "everyone has the right, individually and in association with others": 

 
-         "to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human 
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels" 
(Article 1); 
-         "to form, join and participate in non-governmental organizations, 
associations or groups" and "to communicate with non-governmental or 
intergovernmental organizations" (Article 5(b) and (c));
-         "to offer and provide professionally qualified legal assistance or 
other relevant advice and assistance in defending human rights and fundamental 
freedoms" (Article 9.3(c));
-         "to solicit, receive and utilize resources for the express purpose of 
promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms through peaceful 
means" (Article 13).
 
We express our sincere hope that you will take these considerations 
and requests into account and we thank you in advance.
 
Yours sincerely,
 
Souhayr Belhassen                                                         
Eric Sottas             

FIDH President                                                                
OMCT Secretary General 