Myanmar (ex-Burma):  Myanmar: NLD members detained again
September 25, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Myanmar (ex-Burma) / 2000 / SeptemberMyanmar (ex-Burma): Myanmar: NLD members detained againCase MMR 050900.2 Second Follow-up to Case MMR 050900  Geneva, 25th September 2000  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Myanmar.  New Information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received information that U Tin Oo (NLD Deputy Chairman), along with eight NLD youth members, have been detained by security forces and Aung San Suu Kyi confined to her house in “temporary detention” after attempting to travel by train to Mandalay on the afternoon of 21st September 2000.  According to the information received, Aung San Suu Kyi, U Tin Oo and other party members were told that there were no tickets available to travel to Mandalay that day. In an official statement it is alleged that ''Apparently upset that there were no seats available ... Ms. Suu Kyi lashed out at a station cleaning crew before being asked to leave by station authorities.''  In the early hours of Friday 22nd September, U Tin Oo and eight party members were taken into custody and Aung San Suu Kyi was escorted home.  It is reported that a government official stated on Saturday that U Tin Oo was being held at Ye Mon military base, 50 km (30 miles) north of Yangon.  It is further reported that the police also rounded up some 100 NLD supporters who had gathered at the station in support of the group.  Their whereabouts are unknown.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for their physical and a psychological integrity.  Brief reminder of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT was informed that on 14th September 2000, the restriction of movement of Aung San Suu Kyi and other members of the National League for Democracy (NLD) was reportedly lifted after almost two weeks of virtual house arrest. Previously, it had been announced that by the government that they had been confined to their homes, although it was not clear whether they were under house arrest or not, and access to them had been denied.  This followed an incident on 2 September 2000 when around midnight when nearly 200 riot police raided the NLD roadside convoy, led by Aung San Suu Kyi and U tin Oo, vice chairman, and forced them to return to the capital, ending a nine-day standoff.    No information, however, has been received regarding the 16 members of the NLD Youth members and two leaders who were reportedly imprisoned on 2nd September 2000.  It is also reported that security personnel beat up the NLD youths, guarding the leaders, causing head wounds and injuries to nine.  They were reportedly not hospitalised and sent to Insein prison:  Htun Zaw Zaw (Rangoon division), Myo Nyunt (Rangoon division), Htun Myint (same), Thein Lwin (same), Aung Htoo (same), Khin Oo (same), Moe Thaw (a) Pauk Pauk (same), Myint Kyaw (same), Shwe Gyo (same), Than Htut (same), Nyan Lin Aung (same), Aye Myein Lin (same), Than Htun (same), Thein Swe (Irrawaddy Division), Zaw Min Kyaw (same), Min Aung Nyo (Mon State).  U Soe Myint (a member of Central Executive Committee member and Chairman of Rangoon Division NLD), and Dr. Myo Aung (member of Rangoon Division NLD organising committee) are also reportedly detained in Insein prison.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Myanmar urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of all members of the National League for Democracy, in particular the above-mentioned persons; ii.	order the immediate release of all those detained and put an end to the harassment of all members of the National League for Democracy; iii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into this situation and reported acts of violence in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with international human rights standards.  Addresses  Lieutenant General Khin Nyunt, Secretary 1, State Peace and Development Council, c/o Ministry of Defence, Signal Pagoda Road, Yangon, Union of Myanmar Faxes: + 95 1 229 50  Colonel Hla Min, Office of Strategic Studies, Department of International Affairs, c/o Ministry of Defense, Signal Pagoda Road, Dagon Post Office, Yangon, Union of Myanmar Faxes: + 95 1 229 50  Geneva, 25th September 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 