Mexico:  Joint Press Release: Stop the Criminalisation of Members of CECOP
February  5, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Mexico / 2019 / FebruaryMexico: Joint Press Release: Stop the Criminalisation of Members of CECOP
​JOINT
PRESS STATEMENT
                                   
Geneva-Paris-Stuttgart-Dublin-Brussels-Madrid-The
Hague-Barcelona-Bern, 5 February 2019 – More than one year since the arbitrary
detention of Marco Antonio Suástegui Muñoz and 16 other members of CECOP in the
state of Guerrero, international organisations insist that any impartial
analysis of the situation would require their release at a hearing, tomorrow, 6
February 2019.
One year ago, on 7
January 2018, a confrontation between members of the Community Police (CRAC-PC)
and armed civilians in the community of La Concepción (Guerrero) left 8 people
dead. A subsequent security operation, including elements of the State and
Federal Police and the Army, resulted in 3 people being extrajuducially killed
and at least 25 people detained arbitrarily, most of them members of Consejo de
Ejidos y Comunidades Opositoras a la presa la Parota (CECOP).
The arbitrary arrests
were made without warrants, which was justified by the State Attorney General
on the grounds that there were weapons and drugs present. However, the initial
investigation failed to substantiate these allegations and within a few hours
an arrest warrant for homicide was issued. These actions demonstrate that the
justice system was manipulated to detain these individuals and keep them in
custody for a crime that had no legal or factual basis. In all the cases, there
was ill-treatment, and in at least eight of them, torture. Additionally,
lawyers and members of Centro de Derechos Humanos de la Montaña Tlachinollan
were publicly defamed for legally representing the detainees.
More than a year
since the arbitrary detention, human rights defender Marco Antonio Suástegui
Muñoz and 16 other members of CECOP and the Community Police are still deprived
of their freedom.                  
Despite evidence
demonstrating that several of the detainees were not at the scene and that
several of them were tortured, the judicial authorities have yet to fully
evaluate the testimony of the accused, and have failed so far to investigate
the acts of torture and serious human rights violations committed by the
security forces.
We express our grave
concern that these human rights violations were committed against human rights
defenders from CECOP and CRAC-PC on account of their legitimate work defending
indigenous rights related to land and territory and in confrontation with a
hydroelectric project that threatens the subsistence and security of the local
communities.
Our organisations
reiterate our concern for a pattern of criminalisation in Mexico that silences
the voices of human rights defenders; a pattern that has been corroborated by
the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention. In recent years, it has issued 8
Opinions in which it declared the detention of 32 HRDs as arbitrary and
demanded their immediate release.
Tomorrow, 6 February,
an intermediate hearing will be held in the Court of Control and Criminal
Proceedings in the Judicial District of Tabares, in which evidence will be
presented and the judge will determine the future of the trial. This is a
critical hearing since it will be decided whether the evidence obtained under
torture and other evidenced that has been discredited by the defence will be
taken into account. Should the judge reject this evidence, the 17 HRDs should
be released.
For these reasons,
our organisations demand an end to the arbitrary detention of Marco Antonio
Suástegui Muñoz and the 16 other members of CECOP and the Community Police.
Additionally, we demand that an independent and impartial investigation be
initiated into the serious human rights violations that have been reported,
including the abuse of law and the allegations of torture, ill-treatment and extrajudicial
executions.
 
Signatory Organisations:
World
     Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), in the framework of the Observatory
     for the Protection of Human Rights DefendersFIDH, in the framework of the
     Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights DefendersGerman Coordination for Human Rights in MexicoAsociación de Investigación y Especialización sobre Temas
     Iberoamericanos (AIETI)Asociación Pro Derechos Humanos España (APDHE)Confederación Sindical de Comisiones Obreras (CS. CC.OO.)Ecologistas en AcciónFront Line DefendersMexiko-Forum SchweizProtection InternationalStichting HesterTaula per Mèxic Vredesbeweging PAX
 
For more information,
please contact:
OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui /
     Delphine Reculeau: (+41) 22 809 49 39FIDH: José Carlos Thissen: (+51) 95 41 31
     650Coordinación Alemana: Sandra Schleimer: (+49) (0) 221 25994541AIETI: Raffaela Galante (+34) 915 770 640APDHE: Carmen Molina Muñoz (+34) 914 02 23 12CS. CC.OO: Mohammed Anouar Haidour (+34) 91
     702 80 88Ecologistas en Acción paz@ecologistasenaccion.org; global@ecologistasenaccion.orgFrontline Defenders: Sandra
     Patargo (+ 52) 1 55 5050 9822Mexiko-Forum Schweiz:
     Theres Höchli (+41) 78 656 47 34Protection International: Mireia Crespo (+32) (0) 609 44 09Stichting Hester: Ingrid de Vries (+31) (0) 624 481 571Taula per Mèxic: Arturo
     Landeros ot.taulapermexic@gmail.comVredesbeweging
     PAX: Sander
     Otten Otten@paxforpeace.nl 