Burundi:  Killing of Ernest Manirumva: trial fails to deliver justice
May 24, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Burundi / 2012 / MayBurundi: Killing of Ernest Manirumva: trial fails to deliver justiceBurundi: Activist’s 
Killing Trial Fails to Deliver JusticeDespite Many 
Leads, Investigation Fell Short 

 
23 May 2012 

The verdict on 22 
May, 2012 in the trial of those accused of killing Ernest Manirumva, a Burundian 
anti-corruption activist, has been a missed opportunity to deliver justice, 20 
Burundian and international non-governmental organizations said today in a joint 
statement.  The outcome was a grave disappointment to those who have campaigned 
for his killers to be held to account, as potentially important evidence in the 
case was not pursued. Manirumva had been investigating several sensitive 
cases at the time of his killing in 2009, including allegations of large-scale 
police corruption and illegal weapons purchases. Human rights defenders and 
journalists work in difficult conditions in Burundi and are regularly harassed 
and intimidated because of their work.   “The Public Prosecutor 
willfully ignored calls to investigate senior figures within the Burundian 
security services and national police who may have been involved in the killing 
of Manirumva,” said Hassan Shire Sheikh, Executive Director of the East and Horn 
of Africa Human Rights Defenders Project. On 22 May, the Higher Instance 
Court of Bujumbura sentenced 14 individuals to lengthy prison terms for the 
murder of Manirumva. Early reports have stated that eight individuals were 
sentenced to life imprisonment for the murder of Manirumva, three individuals to 
20 years’ imprisonment for complicity to murder and three individuals to 10 
years’ imprisonment for failure to inform public authorities/non-assistance to 
persons in danger. After procedural delays of one year and nine months, the 
trial was completed in just three days, between 5 and 11 April.  The Public 
Prosecutor did not consider important leads and recommendations from reports by 
the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), which assisted in 
investigations, and a commission of inquiry established by the Burundian 
authorities.     Ernest Manirumva, Vice President of the civil society 
organization Anti-corruption and Economic Malpractice Observatory
(Observatoire de lutte contre la corruption et les malversations 
économiques, OLUCOME) and Vice President of an official body that regulates 
public procurement, was found stabbed to death outside his home in the capital, 
Bujumbura, on 9 April 2009. “Since 2009, the Burundian authorities have 
left the family of Ernest Manirumva and Burundian civil society wondering if 
light would ever be shed on this crime,” said Erwin van der Borght, Amnesty 
International’s Africa Programme Director.  “The court’s ruling today fails to 
uncover the truth and leaves possible perpetrators at large.” The 
Burundian government established three commissions of inquiry to investigate the 
killing and accepted an offer from the FBI to assist in investigations. The 
first two commissions were criticized by Burundian civil society organizations 
for lacking independence and being inactive. A third commission was more 
effective and led to a number of arrests. The FBI report called on the Burundian 
government to carry out additional investigations, including questioning and 
taking DNA samples from individuals cited in the FBI report.   “The 
judicial authorities have at every stage in the proceedings disregarded the 
FBI’s recommendations, and none of the police or military officials mentioned in 
the FBI report have even been investigated,” said Pacifique Nininahazwe, 
delegate general of the Forum for the Strengthening of Civil Society (FORSC). 
The trial opened in July 2010 but was postponed numerous times. On 15 
June 2011, the prosecution requested that the case file be investigated further 
without specifying why.  The lawyers for the partie civile (the party 
representing the victim’s family and OLUCOME) asked for these investigations to 
include questioning, cross-examination, phone record checks and DNA tests of 
individuals named in the FBI and the third commission of inquiry reports. 
Nine months later, when the public hearing re-opened on 30 March 2012, 
the court rejected the request of the partie civile on the grounds that 
the substantive hearing should start as soon as possible.   “Unless all 
credible leads are investigated, some of the perpetrators will continue to enjoy 
immunity from prosecution,” said Mary Lawlor, Director of Front Line Defenders. 
“After years of campaigning, today’s result is a serious blow to civil society.” 
Lawyers for the partie civile also asked the court on 30 March 
2012 to admit recordings and a transcript of a police officer’s statement as 
evidence. Gilbert Havyarimana, a former police officer who said he had witnessed 
Ernest Manirumva’s murder, spoke to a Burundian radio station, African Public 
Radio (Radio Publique Africaine, RPA) in February 2012 about the crime, 
claiming that certain members of the security services were involved, 
potentially exculpating some of the defendants on trial. In a 
demonstration of loss of faith in the judicial process, the partie civile 
said that they would not ask for damages because the court had not considered 
all available evidence. “The court’s failure to accept the partie 
civile’s requests compromises its judicial independence.” said Gabriel 
Rufyiri, the President of the Anti-corruption and Economic Malpractice 
Observatory.  “There is still a burning need for the authorities to investigate 
all credible leads, no matter how sensitive.” Several defendants were 
unlawfully held in pre-trial detention for almost three years. The court failed 
to renew their preventative detention every 30 days, as required under article 
75 of the Burundian Criminal Procedure Code, and to notify suspects of the 
charges against them when they were arrested. The verdict of the court 
has left civil society frustrated and disappointed. Manirumva’s murder had a 
profound impact on activists and galvanized them to form the “Justice for Ernest 
Manirumva” campaign in 2009. “Activists remain under constant pressure and 
several have been intimidated in connection with their work on Manirumva’s 
case,” said Souhayr Belhassen, President of the International Federation for 
Human Rights (FIDH). Members of civil society organizations and 
journalists who have publicly denounced Manirumva’s killing and the failings of 
judicial inquiries into the case have themselves received threats.     
Pierre Claver Mbonimpa, president of the Association for the Protection of 
Human Rights and Detained Persons (APRODH), and Gabriel Rufyiri, president of 
OLUCOME, received a tip from an informant in March 2010 that state agents were 
preparing to assassinate one of them by orchestrating a car accident.  In 
November 2009, Pacifique Nininahazwe, delegate general of FORSC, received 
warnings of a plot to assassinate him. When civil society organizations 
attempted to march without authorization on the second anniversary of 
Manirumva’s death in April 2011, two demonstrators, Gabriel Rufyiri and Claver 
Irambona also of OLUCOME, were arrested by the police commissioner of the 
western region, David Nikiza, who is among the security officials cited in the 
FBI report. They were released a few hours later.   Claver Irambona and 
Prudence Bararunyeretse, another OLUCOME staff member, both told human rights 
organizations that they had experienced security incidents in July 2011. 
Pierre Claver Mbonimpa and Gabriel Rufyiri were repeatedly subject to 
judicial summons in 2011, and were often questioned in relation to the Ernest 
Manirumva case file.   Human rights defenders and journalists in Burundi 
are regularly subjected to judicial summons in relation to their work. 
 Individuals working on sensitive issues have also reported receiving anonymous 
text messages and phone calls threatening them. “The authorities should 
demonstrate support to Burundian human rights defenders and commitment to 
ensuring their protection by delivering justice for Ernest Manirumva’s family 
and OLUCOME,” said Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of the World Organisation 
Against Torture (OMCT). The organizations that 
issued the joint statement are: Burundian organizations: 
Action des Chrétiens pour l’Abolition de la Torture (ACAT) Association 
pour la Protection des Droits Humains et des Personnes Détenues (APRODH) 
Collectif des Associations et ONGs Féminines du Burundi (CAFOB) 
Collectif pour la Promotion des Associations des Jeunes (CPAJ) 
Confédération des Syndicats du Burundi (COSYBU) Forum pour la Conscience 
et le Développement (FOCODE) Forum pour le Renforcement de la Société Civile 
(FORSC) Observatoire de l’Action Gouvernementale (OAG) Observatoire de 
Lutte Contre la Corruption et les Malversations Economiques (OLUCOME) 
Organisation pour la Transparence et la Gouvernance (OTRAG) Ligue 
Burundaise des Droits de l’Homme  ITEKA (Ligue Iteka) Parole et Action pour 
le Réveil des Consciences et l’Evolution des Mentalités (PARCEM) Union 
Burundaise des Journalistes (UBJ) International organizations:
Amnesty International (AI) East and Horn of Africa Human Rights 
Defenders Project (EHAHRDP) Front Line Defenders Human Rights Watch 
(HRW) International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) Protection 
International (PI) World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) 
For more information, please contact:In Bujumbura, for 
the Anti-corruption and Economic Malpractice Observatory (OLUCOME) Gabriel 
Rufyiri (French, Kirundi): + 257-77-741-700In London, for Human Rights 
Watch, Carina Tertsakian (English, French): +44-207-713-2764; or +44-7903-503297 
(mobile) In London, for Amnesty International, Sarah Jackson (English, 
French): +44-7891-717548In Kampala, for the East and Horn of Africa Human 
Rights Defenders Project (EHAHRDP), Rachel Nicholson (English, French): 
+256-778-921-274 