Morocco:  Morocco: arbitrary arrests, detention and torture of three Western Sahara youths
July  1, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Morocco / 2002 / JulyMorocco: Morocco: arbitrary arrests, detention and torture of three Western Sahara youthsCase MAR 010702 Arbitrary detentions / Torture / Orders of  search and capture   The International Secretariat of the OMCT requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Morocco/Western Sahara.  Brief description of the situation:  The International Secretariat of the OMCT has been informed about the detention of the minors Salem Mouloud,  Salek Hazaña  (El Alawi)  and  Duih Mohamed-Fadel, and the issuing of orders of detention against other youths in the occupied city of El Aaiún.    According to the information received from the Saharan Association of the Families of Prisoners and Disappeared (AFAPREDESA), since June 18th 2002, the inhabitants of the occupied city of El Aaiún live in a situation of fear and uncertainty, after a fire consumed the headquarters of a police station in the city.  According to the reports, after the fire, the Saharan police conducted numerous searches, in which many persons were arrested, particularly Saharan youths, of which three remain in detention. It has been reported that the detainees have been subjected to torture and ill-treatment by the police.  The three prisoners, who were presented before the King’s prosecutor, who order their detention, are:  1-     Salem Mouloud. 2-     Salek Hazaña  (El Alawi). 3-     Duih Mohamed-Fadel  The reports affirm that Salem Mouloud is in a critical condition.  According to the information received, numerous youths have been violently interrogated, and many others are fleeing after learning that several orders of capture have been issued against them. In addition, the number of Saharan houses being searched has increased, and the searches are being conducted in a violent and humiliating manner. A curfew was implemented from 10.00 in the evening in Smara, and in El Aaiún police and military patrols are heavily present in the city.  The International Secretariat of the OMCT shares the concern of the Saharan Association of the Families of Prisoners and Disappeared (AFAPREDESA), and of other organizations for the defense of human rights, for the situation that of the Saharan population, for the situation of the prisoners in the Moroccan prisons, and their families, and for the security and physical and psychological integrity of Salem Mouloud, Salek Hazaña  (El Alawi)  and  Duih Mohamed-Fadel, as well as of the other minors against whom orders of capture have been issued in El Aaiún.  Requested action: Please write to the authorities in Morocco urging them to:  i.	Take the necessary measures to guarantee the security and physical and psychological integrity of the Saharan population, and in particular of Salem Mouloud, Salek Hazaña  (El Alawi) and Duih Mohamed-Fadel;   ii.	Order the immediate release of Salem Mouloud, Salek Hazaña  (El Alawi), and Duih Mohamed-Fadel, in the case that they have been detained without valid legal charges, or in the case of having valid charges, take them to an independent and impartial civilian court, and guarantee their legal rights under any circumstances;  iii.	Carry out an immediate and thorough investigation on the events mentioned above, in order to identify those responsible, take them to trial, and apply the civil and/or administrative sanctions, as stated by the law;  iv.	Guarantee the respect for the human rights and the fundamental liberties of all the population, including the Saharan community, in conformity with the dispositions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and with the regional and international pacts and conventions, in particular the Principles and Norms for the treatment of detainees, which has been ratified by Morocco.  Addresses: ·	S.M.  Mohammed VI.  Ibn Al Hassan, Roi du Maroc, Palais Royal, Rabat, Morocco. Fax : (+ 212) 773 07 72.  ·	M.  Abderrahmane El Youssoufi, Premier Ministre, Bureau du Premier  Ministre et Ministre des Affaires Etrangères et de la Coopération, Palais  Royal, Rabat, Maroc. Fax (+ 212 776 99 95    //   76 91 95 ou 77 68 37 ·	M.  Driss Basri, Ministre de l’Interieur, Quartier Administratif, Rabat, Maroc.  Fax : (+ 212) 776 20 56 / 76 64 ·	M. Omar Azziman, Ministre de la Justice et des Droits de l’Homme, Palais de la Manounia, Rabat, Maroc.  Fax:  (+ 212) 773 89 40 / 73 27 10 ·	M. Driss Dahak, President du Conseil Consultatif des Droits de l’Homme (CCDH), Place des Chouhada, B.P. 1341, Rabat, Maroc.  Fax:  (+ 212) 772 68 56  Please also write to the diplomatic representations of Morocco in your respective countries.  Geneva, July 1st  2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken on this case, quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 