India:  India: Denial of the economic, social and cultural rights of the tribal peoples of Wayanad District, Kerala, risks generating further violence
August 18, 2008
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Urgent Interventions / India / 2008 / AugustIndia: India: Denial of the economic, social and cultural rights of the tribal peoples of Wayanad District, Kerala, risks generating further violenceOMCT ACTION FILE (IND 180808.ESCR) - INDIA  Your action is called for to stop violent supression of pacific protest by the police The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) has received reliable information concerning ongoing tensions and police harassment of members of local adivasi community following the breach by the Agricultural University of Kerala of conditions attached to a transfer of land from the adivasi community to the University for the construction of a veterinary college. These conditions were intended to compensate the indigenous community for the appropriation of their land by re-housing them and by providing employment. As a result, the affected adivasi families have been left homeless and have lost their livelihood. This has exacerbated the poverty suffered by the already marginalised community and has led them to engage in pacific protest activities. In turn, the police have responded with harassment, intimidation and ill-treatment of community members, and have brought false charges against the protest leaders. OMCT condemns the police reaction and expresses concern that, unless remedial steps are taken, the adivasi community will continue to be persecuted by the authorities. Steps must be taken to bring an end to the threats and harassment, prevent further violence and ensure the community’s full enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights. OMCT calls upon the Union Government of India and the State Government of Kerala to, inter alia, take action to ensure compliance by the University Authorities with the conditions attached to the transfer of land and provide reparation as appropriate. It also calls for a prompt, impartial and independent inquiry into the failure of the University to comply with the conditions and into police action against the community, as well as the prosecution of perpetrators of human rights violations. OMCT further calls upon the Union and State Governments to ensure that the police fully respect the rights of the adivasi community and that an immediate end is put to the harassment and intimidation of this community.  Please see the attached document for more detailed information and OMCT's requests for action. 