China:  Ongoing incommunicado detention of Mr. Li Ming-che
November 15, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / China / 2018 / NovemberChina: Ongoing incommunicado detention of Mr. Li Ming-che
New information
CHN 002 / 0417 / OBS 034.3
Incommunicado detention
China
November 15, 2018

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has
received new information and requests your intervention in the following
situation in China.
New information:
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing
incommunicado detention of Mr. Li Ming-che, Programme Manager at
Wen-Shan Community College in Taiwan and a volunteer with the Taiwan-based NGO
Covenants Watch[1].

According to the information received, on November 9, 2018, Chinese
authorities rejected a request by Mrs. Lee Ching-yu - Mr. Li Ming-che’s wife -
to visit her husband in Chi-Shan prison on November 12. 
Moreover, on October 19, 2018, the Taiwan's Mainland Affairs Council
(MAC)[2] was informed by reliable
sources that Mr. Li Ming-che had been transferred from Chi-Shan prison in Hunan
to Yan-Cheng prison, in Hebei Province[3].
On October 31, 2018, the MAC was informed that Mr. Li Ming-che had been
transferred back to Chi-Shan prison. However, neither Mr. Li Ming-che’ s family
members nor MAC received an official notice about these two transfers from the
Chinese government. Chinese authorities also failed to provide any reasons for
the transfers.
Mrs. Lee Ching-yu was able to visit her husband five times since March 2018. Some visiting requests were rejected or
postponed without any reason by the Chinese government. Mrs. Lee Ching-yu last
visited her husband on September 10, 2018. According to Chinese prison
regulations, prisoners are allowed to make phone calls to their families at a
prior-designated and approved number. Nonetheless, Mrs. Lee Ching-yu has never
received any phone calls at this number or any correspondence from Mr. Li
Ming-che.
Since
Mrs. Lee Ching-yu’s last visit on September
10, 2018, Mr. Li Ming-che’s family has not received any information about his
fate or whereabouts.
The
Observatory recalls that Mr. Li Ming-che remains
arbitrarily detained since March 19, 2017. On November 28, 2017, he was
sentenced to five years in prison (see background information).
The Observatory
strongly condemns the ongoing arbitrary and incommunicado detention of
Mr. Li Ming-che, which seems to be merely aimed at punishing him for his
legitimate and peaceful human rights activities, and remains concerned about Mr. Li Ming-che’s health, as he suffers
from hypertension.
The Observatory urges Chinese authorities to disclose Mr. Li
Ming-che’s whereabouts, to immediately and unconditionally release him and to
ensure his psychological and physical integrity.
Background information: 
On
March 19, 2017, Mr. Li Ming-che was detained after entering mainland China
for personal matters from Macau through the Gongbei Port immigration checkpoint
located in Zhuhai, Guangdong Province. Chinese authorities refused to disclose
his fate or whereabouts until March 29, 2017, when they revealed that
Mr. Li Ming-che was being detained at an undisclosed location and
investigated by State security police on suspicion of “endangering national
security”.
Prior to his arrest,
Mr. Li Ming-che had shared the experience of Taiwan’s democratic process
with his Chinese friends online and sent them books on human rights and modern
history. In early 2016, he was active online to encourage donations to support
the families of Chinese human rights activists who had been detained by Chinese
authorities.
On April 10, 2017,
Mr. Li Ming-che’s wife attempted to fly to Beijing to seek information
about her husband’s detention but she was prevented from boarding her flight
after Chinese authorities revoked her travel pass.
On May 26, 2017,
Chinese authorities issued a statement to confirm the detention of Mr. Li
Ming-che.
On September 11, 2017,
Mr. Li Ming-che was briefly allowed to see his family, for the first time
since his arrest. The same day, his trial opened before the Yueyang
Intermediate Court in Hunan Province. During the first hearing, Mr. Li
Ming-che pleaded guilty to the charges brought against him. Li Ming-che
confessed that he had “disseminated articles and essays that maliciously
attacked and defamed the Chinese government, the Chinese Communist Party and
China’s current political system,” and that he had “incited the subversion of
State power.” It is feared that this confession, which was filmed and released
online on Youtube by Yueyang Court, had been made under pressure from Chinese
authorities.
On
November 28, 2017, Yueyang Intermediate Court sentenced Mr. Li Ming-che to
five years in prison after founding him guilty on charges of “subverting State
power”. The court also stripped him of all political rights in China for two
years. Mr. Li Ming-che did not appeal the verdict.
Actions requested:
Please write to the authorities of China asking them to:
i.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological
integrity of Mr. Li Ming-che, as well as that of all human rights
defenders in China, including by
ensuring immediate and unhindered access to medical care;
ii. Immediately
disclose Mr. Li Ming-che’s fate and whereabouts and release him
immediately and unconditionally as his detention is arbitrary since it only
seems to aim at punishing him for his human rights activities;
iii. Guarantee the
unhindered access of Mr. Li Ming-che to a lawyer of his choice and his
family members;
iv. Put an end to all
acts of harassment - including at the judicial level - against Mr. Li
Ming-che and all human rights defenders in the country so that they are able to
carry out their work without hindrance;
v. Comply
with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the
United Nations on December 9, 1998, in particular with its Articles
1, 6(c) and 12.2; and
vi. Ensure in all
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other international human
rights instruments signed or ratified by China.
Addresses:
·     Mr. Li
Keqiang, Prime Minister of the People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 659 611
09 (c/o Ministry of Foreign Affairs), Email: premier@mail.gov.cn
·     Mr. Guo
Shengkun, Minister of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China, Fax:
+86 10 63099216, Email: gabzfwz@mps.gov.cn
·     H.E.
Mr. Zhaoxu Ma, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of
China to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 793 70 14,
E-mail: chinamission_gva@mfa.gov.cn
·     H.E.
Mr. QU XING, Ambassador, Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in
Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32-2-7792895; Email: chinaemb_be@mfa.gov.cn
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of China in your respective
countries.
***
Paris-Geneva, November 15, 2018
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this
programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society. 



[1]   Established in 2009, Taiwan-based Covenants
Watch monitors the Taiwanese Government’s fulfilment of its international
obligations stemming from human rights conventions, conducts policy training
and advocacy activities, and serves as a platform for collaboration for other
human rights groups operating in Taiwan.


[2]    The MAC is an
administrative agency under the Executive Yuan (branch) of the Government of Taiwan.
It is responsible for the planning, development, and implementation of policies
concerning relations between Taiwan and China.


[3]   Yan-Cheng prison in Hebei Province is the
only prison directly managed by the Ministry of Justice. 