Turkey:  Release and ongoing judicial harassment of Sebnem Korur Fincanci, Erol Onderoglu and Ahmet Nesin
July  5, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2016 / JulyTurkey: Release and ongoing judicial harassment of Sebnem Korur Fincanci, Erol Onderoglu and Ahmet Nesin 
New informationTUR 004 / 0616 / OBS 049.1Release / Judicial harassmentTurkeyJuly 5, 2016
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent intervention in
the following situation in Turkey.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the release and ongoing judicial harassment of Ms. Şebnem Korur Fincancı, President of the Human Rights
Foundation of Turkey (HRFT), Mr. Erol Önderoğlu, Turkey Representative
of Reporters Without Borders (RWB), and Mr. Ahmet Nesin, journalist. 
 
According to the information received, on June 30, 2016, the 13th
High Criminal Court ordered the provisional release of Ms. Fincancı and Mr. Önderoğlu. On July 1, 2016, the
14th Heavy Penal Court ordered the provisional release of Mr. Ahmet
Nesin. They remain charged with “making terror propaganda” under Article 7/2 of
the Anti Terror Law, and their first court hearing will be held on November 8,
2016. The charges seem to relate to the participation of the three human rights
defenders in the “Editor-in-chief on Duty” campaign, launched in early May 2016
in solidarity with the Özgür Gündem
newspaper and to defend the freedom of press in Turkey against the harassment
of, and investigations against, its journalists[1].

 
The Observatory
welcomes the release of Ms.
Şebnem Korur Fincancı, Mr. Erol Önderoğlu and Mr. Ahmet Nesin but deplores
their continuing judicial harassment, which
seems to merely aim at sanctioning their human rights activities.
 
The Observatory calls upon the Turkish authorities to drop all the charges against them and, in the meantime, to ensure that all judicial
proceeding against them are carried out in full compliance with their right to
a fair trial, as protected under international law. 
 
Background information:
 
On June 20, 2016, the 1st High Court of Peace in
Istanbul ordered the detention of Ms. Şebnem
Korur Fincancı, Mr. Ahmet Nesin and Mr. Erol Önderoğlu, pending an
investigation into their alleged involvement in the propaganda of terrorism.
The human rights defenders presented themselves after they had received arrest
warrants, and were referred to the 1st High Court of Peace after testifying
before the Prosecutor on Terror and Organised Crime at the Istanbul Court House
in Çağlayan earlier that day, under accusations of “making terror propaganda”
(Article 7/2 of the Anti Terror Law). Ms. Şebnem Korur Fincancı, Mr. Ahmet Nesin and Mr. Erol Önderoğlu were
questioned in relation to their participation in the “Editor-in-chief on Duty”
campaign launched in early May 2016 in solidarity with the Özgür Gündem
newspaper.

 
Ms. Fincancı was detained at Bakırköy Women Closed
Prison, while Messrs. Önderoğlu and Nesin were held in Metris Prison in
Istanbul. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Turkey, urging them
to:
 
i. Drop all the charges against Ms. Şebnem Korur
Fincancı, Mr. Erol Önderoğlu and Mr. Ahmet Nesin and, in the meantime, ensure
that any judicial proceedings against them is carried out in full compliance
with the defendants' right to a fair trial, as protected under international
law;
 
ii. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of all human rights defenders in Turkey, including Ms.
Şebnem Korur Fincancı, Mr. Erol Önderoğlu and Mr. Ahmet Nesin;
 
iii. Put an end to all acts of harassment, including
the judicial level, against all human rights defenders in Turkey so that they are able to
carry out their work without hindrance or fear of reprisals;
 
iv. Put an end to the ongoing crackdown on civil
society under the pretext of countering terrorism and recognise the legitimate
role of human rights defenders, in line with Turkey's international
obligations;
 
v. Comply with all the provisions of the United
Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular
its Articles 1, 12.1 and 12.2;
 
vi. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by Turkey.

Addresses:

President of Turkey,
Recep, Mr. Tayyip Erdoğan, Fax: (+90 312) 525 58 31, E-mail: contact@tccb.gov.trPrime Minister of Turkey, Mr. Ahmet Davutoglu; Fax:
+90 (312) 403 62
82Minister of Justice, Mr. Bekir Bozdağ,
Fax: +90 (0312) 419 33 70; E-mail: info@adalet.gov.trMinister of Interior, Mr. Efkan Ala; Fax: +90 (312) 425 61 30; Email: ozelkalem@icisleri.gov.trAmbassador Izzet Selim Yenel, Diplomatic Mission of
Turkey to the European Union in Brussels, Fax: + 32 2 511 04 50Ambassador Mehmet Ferden Çarikçi, Permanent Mission of
Turkey to the United Nations in Geneva, Fax: +41 22 734 08 59; Email: mission.turkey@ties.itu.int
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Turkey in your respective country.


[1] Özgür
Gündem started the “Editor-in-chief on Duty” campaign on May 3, 2016 to
express solidarity and defend press freedom against a number of investigations
faced by the newspaper. A total of 49 prominent journalists have served as
one-day editors-in-chief since the beginning of the campaign. Some 37 of them
have been investigated up to now. Yet, Ms. Fincancı, Mr. Önderoğlu and Mr.
Nesin are first persons to be arrested and detained in relation to the
campaign. 