China:  Incommunicado detention of human rights lawyer Jiang Tianyong
January  9, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / China / 2017 / JanuaryChina: Incommunicado detention of human rights lawyer Jiang Tianyong





CHN 001 / 0117 / OBS 002
Enforced
disappearance /
Arbitrary
and incommunicado detention /
Judicial
harassment
China
January 9,
2017
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in China.
 
Description
of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the incommunicado
detention of human rights lawyer Jiang
Tianyong, a leader of the China Human Rights Lawyers Group[1]
and an outspoken supporter of detained rights lawyers from the “709
Crackdown”[2].
 
According
to the information received, since he was taken into custody by public security
officers on November 21, 2016, Chinese authorities have failed to disclose Mr.
Jiang Tianyong’s whereabouts and have prevented his lawyers from having access
to him. Most recently, on December 29, 2016, Changsha Public Security Bureau rejected the request
of his defence lawyer to meet him.
 
On November
21, 2016, Mr. Jiang Tianyong went missing as he was meant to board a train to
Beijing from Changsha in Hunan Province, where he had met the wife and lawyers
of Mr. Xie Yang, a “709 Crackdown”
human rights lawyer currently detained at Changsha City Detention Centre[3].
Mr. Jiang’s family members and lawyers immediately reported his disappearance
to the authorities. However, the police refused to file a missing person case. 
 
On December 16, 2016, Chinese
authorities finally confirmed through media reports that Mr. Jiang Tianyong had
been taken into custody by public security officers, and given a nine-day
administrative detention for “fraudulent use of another person’s ID”. They also
specified that on December 1, 2016, he was placed under “compulsory criminal
measures” for “illegally possessing documents classified as State secrets”
(under Article 282 of Criminal Law) and “illegally disseminating State secrets
to overseas [sources]” (Article 111) and other unnamed “crimes”. If convicted
under Article 111, Mr. Jiang faces life imprisonment.
 
On
December 23, 2016, Mr. Jiang’s family members received a notification from the Changsha City Public Security
Bureau, informing that he had been put under residential
surveillance at an unknown “place designated by the police”, a form of
extrajudicial secret detention, on suspicion of “inciting subversion of State
power” (Article 105 (2)). Under such circumstances, in the absence of access
to his lawyers, the Observatory fears that Mr. Jiang might be subjected to
torture to force him to confess while being interrogated.
 
The Observatory strongly condemns
the incommunicado detention of Mr. Jiang Tianyong, and urges the Chinese
authorities to immediately and unconditionally release him as his detention
appears to be only aimed at sanctioning his legitimate human rights activities.

 
The Observatory recalls that Mr.
Jiang Tianyong’s licence was revoked in 2009 for defending or supporting many
high-profile human rights defenders. Since then, Mr. Jiang has taken an active
role in organizing Chinese human rights lawyers to provide legal counsel to
victims of rights abuses and criticized authorities’ abuses of legal rights.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities of the People’s Republic of China
asking them to:
 
i.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr.
Jiang Tianyong, as well as that of all human rights defenders in the People’s Republic of China;
 
ii. Immediately disclose Mr.
Jiang Tianyong’s whereabouts and
release him immediately and unconditionally as his detention is arbitrary since it
only seems to aim at sanctioning his human rights activities;
 
iii. Guarantee his right to a fair trial,
as protected under international law, including access to his lawyers;
 
iv. Put an end to all forms of harassment
- including at the judicial level - against Mr. Jiang
Tianyong and all human
rights defenders in the country so that they are able to carry out their work
without hindrance;
 
v.
Comply with all the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in
particular with its Articles 1, 5(b), and 12.2;
 
vi.
Guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other international human
rights instruments signed or ratified by the People’s
Republic of China.
 
Addresses:
 
·
Mr. Li Keqiang, Prime Minister
of the People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 659 611 09 (c/o Ministry of
Foreign Affairs), Email: premier@mail.gov.cn  
· Mr. Guo Shengkun, Minister of Public Security of the People’s Republic
of China, Fax: +86 10 63099216, Email: gabzfwz@mps.gov.cn 
· H.E. Mr. Zhaoxu Ma, Ambassador,
Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China to the United Nations in
Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 793 70 14, E-mail: chinamission_gva@mfa.gov.cn
· H.E. Mr. QU XING, Ambassador, Embassy of the People’s Republic of China
in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32-2-7792895; Email: chinaemb_be@mfa.gov.cn
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of the
People’s Republic of China in your respective country.
 
***
Geneva-Paris,
January 9, 2017
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by OMCT and FIDH. The objective of this programme is to prevent
or remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and
FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.




[1] The China Human Rights Lawyers Group
is a network of rights lawyers in China founded on September 13, 2013. In 2016,
it had a membership of 315 lawyers.


[2] For more information, see the Joint
Statement issued on January 15, 2016.


[3] For more information, see https://www.nchrd.org/2016/09/xie-yang/ 