Bangladesh:  Abduction of Mr. Abu Bakar Siddique, the husband of Ms. Syeda Rizwana Hasan, Executive Director of the Bangladesh Environmental Lawyer’s Association (BELA)
April 17, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2014 / AprilBangladesh: Abduction of Mr. Abu Bakar Siddique, the husband of Ms. Syeda Rizwana Hasan, Executive Director of the Bangladesh Environmental Lawyer’s Association (BELA)​













BGD 001 / 0414 / OBS 029
Abduction
Bangladesh
April 17, 2014
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Bangladesh.
 
Brief description of the situation:
 
The Observatory
has been informed with great concern about the abduction of Mr. Abu Bakar Siddique, the husband of Ms.
Syeda Rizwana Hasan, Executive Director of the Bangladesh Environmental Lawyer’s Association
(BELA).
 
According to the
information received, on April 16, 2014, unidentified men abducted Mr. Abu
Bakar Siddique, a businessman, from Fatulla in Narayanganj, while he was
travelling to Dhaka from Narayanganj by car. The vehicle with the unidentified
men hit Mr. Abu Bakar Siddique's car near Bhuiyan Filling Station in Fatulla at
around 2:45pm. When Mr. Siddique and the driver of his car, Ripon, exited the
car to assess the damage, the unidentified men sprayed something into Ripon’s
eyes, blinding him, and took Mr. Siddique away.
 
The Observatory strongly
condemns Mr.
Abu Bakar Siddique’s abduction, and fears that it merely aims at
sanctioning the human rights activities of his wife, Ms. Syeda Rizwana Hasan.
 
In the past, Ms. Syeda Rizwana
Hasan and her relatives have been subjected to threats because of her human
rights activities against illegal encroachment, land grabbing, industrial
pollution and other illegal acts affecting the environment. In 2012, she
received the Ramon Magsaysay Award for her "uncompromising courage and
impassioned leadership in a campaign of judicial activism in Bangladesh that
affirms the people’s right to a good environment as nothing less than their
right to dignity and life".
 
The Observatory fears for
Mr. Abu Bakar Siddique’s
physical and psychological integrity, and calls upon the authorities of
Bangladesh to take prompt action in order to disclose his whereabouts and to guarantee in all circumstances his physical and
psychological integrity.
 
More generally, the Observatory is greatly concerned by acts of reprisals
against relatives of human rights defenders in Bangladesh, as those acts seem to merely aim at silencing their human rights activities, and calls upon the authorities of
Bangladesh to ensure
in all circumstances that defenders are able to carry out their legitimate
activities without any hindrance or fear of reprisals.
 
Action requested:
 
Please write to
the authorities in Bangladesh, urging them to:
 
i. Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological
integrity of Mr. Abu Bakar Siddique, Ms. Syeda Rizwana Hasan and her relatives, as well as of all human rights defenders
in Bangladesh;
 
ii.
Take prompt action in order to disclose the whereabouts of Mr. Abu Bakar Siddique;
 
iii. Order
an immediate, thorough, effective and impartial investigation into the
above-mentioned facts, the result of which must be made public, in order to
identify all those responsible, bring them before a competent and impartial
civil tribunal and apply to them the penal sanctions provided by the law;
 
iv. Put an
end to any kind of harassment against all human rights defenders
in Bangladesh and ensure
in all circumstances that they are able to carry out their legitimate
activities without any hindrance or fear of reprisals;
 
v. Conform with
the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the
General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially:
-       its
Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”, as well as
-       its
Article 12.2, which provides that the State shall “take all necessary measures
to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually
and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action
as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of his or her rights”; 
 
vi. Ensure in all
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with international human rights standards and international instruments
ratified by Bangladesh.
 
Addresses:
 
·      
Ms. Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister, Office
of the Prime Minister, Gona Bhaban, Old Sangsad Bhaban, Tejgaon, Dhaka,
Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 8113243, Email: pm@pmo.gov.bd
·      
Professor Dr. Gowher Rizvi, Adviser to
the Prime Minister (International Affairs), Old Sangsad Bhaban, Tejgaon, Dhaka
1215, Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 9111312
Email: advinternational@pmo.gov.bd  
·      
Mr. Asaduzzaman Khan, State Minister for
Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat Building 8, 1st
and 3rd florr, Dhaka, Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 9515541. Email: stateminister@mha.gov.bd
·      
Mr. Anisul Huq, Minister for Law, Justice
and Parliamentary Affairs, Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs,
Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka, Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 7168557. Email: minoflaw@law.com 
·      
Md. Shahriar Alam, State Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Segun Bagicha, Dhaka 1000, Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 9562188.
Email: fm@mofa.gov.bd
·      
Mr. Mahbubey Alam, Attorney General for
Bangladesh, Attorney General's Office, Supreme Court Premises, Dhaka,
Bangladesh, Email: adv_mahbubey@yahoo.com
·      
H.E. Mr. Abdul Hannan, Ambassador,
Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh to the United Nations
in Geneva, 65 rue de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 46 16,
E-mail: mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.int
·      
Embassy of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh in Brussels, 29-31 rue J. Jordaens, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32
2 646 59 98; Email: bdootbrussels@skynet.be
 
Please also write
to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Bangladesh in your respective
country as well as to
the EU diplomatic missions or embassies in Bangladesh.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, April
17, 2014
 
Kindly inform us
of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory,
an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the protection of human rights
defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need. 
 
To contact the
Observatory, call the emergency line:
·      
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 /
+ 41 22 809 49 29
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 /
+33 1 43 55 18 80 