Egypt:  Egypt: Failure in the inquiries on sexual assault of three women
August  3, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2005 / AugustEgypt: Egypt: Failure in the inquiries on sexual assault of three womenCase EGY 130605.1 VAW Follow-up to EGY 130605 VAW VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN Sexual Assault and Intimidation  Geneva, 3 August 2005  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Egypt.  New InformationThe International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by Arab Center for the Independence of the Judiciary and the Legal Profession (ACIJLP), a member of the OMCT Network, that the Attorney General has failed to announce the results of inquiries into the events which occurred during the Article 76 Referendum demonstrations that took place on 25 May 2005.  Brief  Reminder of the SituationAccording to the information received from ACIJLP three women were sexually assaulted and one man was physically assaulted, while they were at a demonstration about the Article 76 Amendment Referendum. Although the prosecution office has initiated investigations, victims and witnesses continue to be threatened and intimidated by security forces. ACIJLP has received complaints from the following three women whom were sexually assaulted during the demonstrations:  1.      Abeer Ahmed Hassan 2.      Hany Isshaq Sumaan 3.      Shaymaa Abu el Kheir Suleiman  Members of the security forces have reportedly followed, harassed and monitored the movements of these women and their families. Furthermore, according to the information received, the security forces are pressuring these women to change their statements.  The International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its deep concern over the ill-treatment of these persons by members of the security forces and the failure of the Attorney General to release the findings of the inquiries.  Action requestedPlease write to the authorities in Egypt urging them to: i.	Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the women mentioned above; ii.	Order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of the sexual assaults and subsequent threats and intimidation from security officials, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iii.	Guarantee that adequate reparation is provided to the victims; iv.	Guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  AddressesPresident of the Arab Republic of Egypt, His Excellency Mohammad Hosni Mubarak, Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: webmaster@presidency.gov.eg, Fax:+202 390 1998  Minister of the Interior, His Excellency General Habib al-Adeli, Ministry of the Interior, Al-Sheikh Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: moi@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 579 2031  Minister of Justice, His Excellency Mr Faruq Sayf al-Nasr, Ministry of Justice, Midan Lazoghly, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 795 8103   Public Prosecutor, Counsellor Maher 'Abd al-Wahid, Dar al-Qadha al-'Ali, Ramses Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 577 4716  Ambassadeur Gabr, Naéla, Av. Blanc 49 (2ème), CH-1202, Genève, Suisse, e-mail: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, fax: +4122 738 44 15  Please also write to the embassies of Egypt in your respective country.  Geneva, 3 August 2005.  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 