Kyrgyzstan:  Torture including threat of rape on woman by police
September 23, 2008
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2008 / SeptemberKyrgyzstan: Torture including threat of rape on woman by policeCase KGZ 230908/ KGZ 230908.VAW URGENT CAMPAIGNS/ VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN Torture including threat of rape/ Pre-trial detention The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) has received information and requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Kyrgyzstan. Brief description of the situation The International Secretariat of OMCT has received information from the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR), a member of the OMCT SOS-Torture Network, regarding the case of Ms. Nafisa Torogeldi kyzy, 18 years, arrested and tortured in Talas, Kyrgyzstan. According to the information received, Ms. Torogeldi kyzy was arrested at her home on 22 July 2008 by members of the Talas police on suspicion of theft. At the Talas police department, although she admitted to having stolen a mobile phone, members of the police attempted to force her to confess to other thefts which she denied. Ms. Torogeldi kyzy was undressed by a female police officer in front of male officers, who then severely beat her on the head, stomach and kidney. Further, she was insulted and threatened with rape if she did not confess to committing the other offences. According to the same information received, after human rights defender Ms. Aziza Abdrasulova intervened on Ms. Torogeldi kyzy’s behalf before the Office of the Prosecutor, a medical expertise was conducted attesting the beatings she was subjected to. Despite the defender’s complaint, the medical evidence and the fact that Ms. Torogeldi kyzy identified one of the policemen who tortured her as Ryspek, no investigation has been ordered into these events. OMCT is concerned by the severe physical and psychological violence inflicted on Ms. Torogeldi kyzy, and the failure of the Kyrgyz authorities to provide her with adequate medical and psychological assistance and to investigate into the torture allegation. OMCT is also concerned that Ms. Torogeldi kyzy’s continued pre-trial detention in an insulator at the Talas police department may expose her to further ill-treatment and suffering, in particular given the lack of rehabilitation measures and her young age. OMCT recalls that the UN Convention against Torture, to which Kyrgyzstan is a party, states in its Article 11 that “Each State Party shall keep under systematic review interrogation rules, instructions, methods and practices as well as arrangements for the custody and treatment of persons subjected to any form of arrest, detention or imprisonment in any territory under its jurisdiction, with a view to preventing any cases of torture”. Further, Article 12 also requires that the State “ensure that its competent authorities proceed to a prompt and impartial investigation, wherever there is reasonable ground to believe that an act of torture has been committed in any territory under its jurisdiction”. OMCT also recalls that the UN Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women states in its article 4(c) that States should "exercise due diligence to prevent, investigate and, in accordance with national legislation, punish acts of violence against women, whether those acts are perpetrated by the State or by private persons." Action requested: Please write to the authorities in Kyrgyzstan urging them to:   Take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Nafisa Torogeldi kyzy;  Ensure that she is given a prompt and fair trial, in which her procedural rights are guaranteed at all times, and that she is not subjected to prolonged pre-trial detention for a petty theft;  Ensure a thorough and impartial investigation into these allegations of torture in order to bring the responsible to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  Guarantee that adequate rehabilitation and compensation is awarded to the victim;  Guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses:  Mr. Bakiev Kurmanbek Salievich, President of Kyrgyz Republic, Kyrgyzskaya Respublika, 720003. Bishkek, Prospekt Chuy, 205, Fax: 996312218627, ghpress2@rhl.bishkek.su  Mr. Igor Vasilevitch Tchudinov, Prime Minister, Fax: 996312218627 Mr. Moldomusa Kongantiev, Minister of Internal Affairs, Fax: 996312663031, 996312288788 Mr. Marat Kaipov, Minister of Justice, Fax: 996312663044 / 996312656502 Mr. Elmurza Satybaldiev, Public Prosecutor of the Kyrgyz of Republic, Fax: 996312665411 Permanent mission of Kyrgyzstan, Rue Maunoir 26, 1207 Geneva, Switzerland, Email: kyrgyzmission@bluewin.ch, Fax: +41 22 707.92.21  Please also write to the embassies of Kyrgyzstan in your respective country.     *   Geneva, 23 September 2008. Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 