Congo, Democratic Republic:  'D.R. Congo
February 27, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Congo, Democratic Republic / 2002 / FebruaryCongo, Democratic Republic: 'D.R. CongoCase COD 150200  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Democratic Republic of Congo.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source of the arrest and disappearance of Archbishop Kataliko in Democratic Republic of Congo.  According to the information received, Archbishop Kataliko was arrested on Saturday 12th February as he returned from an Episcopal Conference in Kinshasa, via Nairobi, Kampala and Goma.  His flight landed in Goma at 10:20 am.  Mgr. Kataliko, who had an onward journey to Bukavu was restrained as he descended from the plane by five RDC soldiers.  He has not been seen since.  It is reported that Mgr. Kataliko has been evacuated from Goma to an unknown destination.    The reason for his arrest is believed to be the content of a Christmas message in 1999.  According to further information, following this, he was advised by the RDC authorities to "stay where he was" and declared a "persona non grata".  The International Secretariat is gravely concerned by these events and for the physical and psychological integrity of Mgr. Kataliko, particularly in light of the murder of his predecessor, Mgr. Muzihirwa, brutally killed and his body found half-naked on a public highway.  The arrest of Mgr. Kataliko also coincides with the visit of Cardinal Etsou to the United States to attend  an international conference on the role of the church in achieving peace and reconciliation in the Congo.  The Cardinal has recently also taken part in a meeting of delegates Congolese Churches and in discussions of the United Nations Security Council on the Congo.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Democratic Republic of Congo urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to locate and guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mgr. Kataliko;  ii.	order his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at  all times;  iii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these events, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law  iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  S.E. Monsieur Laurent-Désiré Kabila, Président de la République, Présidence de la République, Kinshasa-Ngaliema, République Démocratique du Congo. Fax (+ 243) 88 02 120   Monsieur M. Gaetan Kakudji, Ministre de l'Etat à l'Intérieur, Hôtel du Conseil exécutif, Kinshasa-Gombe, République Démocratique du Congo.   Monsieur, M. Mwemze Kongolo, Ministre de la Justice, Ministère de la Justice, BP 3137, Kinshasa-Gombe, République Démocratique du Congo.      Me Joseph Mudumbi, Chef du Département de l'Administration du territoire du R.C.D. Goma - République Démocratique du Congo, N  télécopie : 00 871 761 850 629 ou  632.  Me Jean-Marie Emungu Ehumba, Chef du Département de la Justice, Réformes institutionnelles et Droits humains du R.C.D. Goma - République Démocratique du Congo N  télécopie : Idem.  Geneva, February 15, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 