Thailand:  Press Release: Somyot Phrueksakasemsuk must be released on bail
January 23, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2015 / JanuaryThailand: Press Release: Somyot Phrueksakasemsuk must be released on bailParis-Geneva, January 23, 2015 - Thailand’s Supreme Court must
immediately release on bail human rights defender Somyot Phrueksakasemsuk, as a
first step towards his unconditional release, the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, an FIDH-OMCT joint programme, said today.
 
The Observatory made the call on the third
anniversary of the Bangkok Criminal Court’s conviction of Somyot on charges of
lèse-majesté (Article 112 of the Thai Criminal Code), on January 23, 2012.
Somyot is the Editor of the magazine “Voice
of Thaksin” (Voice of the Oppressed)
and a free speech advocate who called for the amendment of Thailand’s
lèse-majesté laws.
 
“The Thai judiciary’s determination
to keep Somyot behind bars pending trial as if he were a dangerous criminal is
absurd,” said FIDH President Karim
Lahidji. “The Supreme Court must immediately order his release on bail
under reasonable and appropriate conditions and expedite the appeal process.”
 
On November 19, 2014, Somyot filed an appeal to
the Supreme Court against his conviction. Somyot remains
incarcerated in Bangkok Remand Prison pending his appeal. He has been detained
since his arrest on April 30, 2011. Somyot suffers from gout and hypertension
and is not receiving adequate medical treatment at Bangkok Remand Prison. Court
officials have denied Somyot’s requests for bail 16 times - the last time on
November 18.
 
On September
19, 2014, the
Court of
Appeals upheld the Bangkok Criminal Court’s lèse-majesté conviction of Mr.
Somyot Phrueksakasemsuk. The court failed to inform Somyot, his lawyer, and his
family members that the hearing would take place on that day.
 
“Somyot’s ongoing deprivation of
liberty is in violation of Article 9 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, to which Thailand is a State party, which elucidates the
principle that release pending trial must be the rule and detention the
exception,” said OMCT Secretary General
Gerald Staberock.
 
Eleven people, including Somyot, are currently serving prison terms
after being found guilty of violating Article 112 of the Criminal Code. In
addition, at least another 16 remain detained
on lèse-majesté charges.
 
 
For more information, please contact:
·      
FIDH:
Arthur Manet / Audrey Couprie: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
·      
OMCT:
Miguel Martin Zumalacarregui: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 24 