Bahrain:  Release on bail and ongoing judicial harassment faced by Mr. Mohamed Issa Al Tajer
August  9, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2011 / AugustBahrain: Release on bail and ongoing judicial harassment faced by Mr. Mohamed Issa Al Tajer

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
 
New Information
BHR 003 / 0411 / OBS 065.2
Release on bail / Judicial harassment
Bahrain
August 9, 2011
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests 
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Bahrain.
 
New Information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the 
release on bail and ongoing judicial harassment faced by Mr. 
Mohamed Issa Al Tajer, a prominent human rights lawyer.
 
According to the information received, on August 6, 2011, Mr. Mohamed 
Issa Al Tajer was released on bail. Before his release, he was forced to sign 
documents stating that he would appear before courts and be available for 
interrogation at any time if summoned. He was also required to declare that he 
would not carry out "activities against the 
country".
 
The Observatory firmly denounces the continued judicial harassment 
faced by Mr. Mohamed Issa Al Tajer, which seems to merely aim at sanctioning his 
peaceful and legitimate human rights activities as a defence lawyer, and 
moreover condemns the lack of due process in the trial held against him over the 
past months before the Lower National Safety Court (see background information). 

 
The Observatory also condemns the ill-treatments suffered by Mr. Al 
Tajer while in detention: he was reportedly beaten on his head, forced to stand 
up with his hands against the wall. He also suffered from deprivation of sleep 
and was forbidden to go to the toilet. He also reportedly heard other prisoners 
being tortured.
 
The Observatory recalls the judicial proceedings launched against Mr. 
Al Tajer took place within the context of an intensified crackdown against 
activists, including human rights defenders, who have supported or are alleged 
to have supported the protest movement which started in Bahrain in February 
2011. Hundreds of individuals are still arbitrarily detained, and access to the 
majority of these detainees, including by their lawyers, is not guaranteed. 
Concern about the physical integrity and life of those arrested are consequently 
high.
 
Background Information:
 
At around 11 pm on April 15, 2011, a group of more than 20 masked and 
armed plain-clothes men, belonging to security forces, entered without any 
warrant the house where Mr. Al Tajer was present with his wife and young 
children. At 00.30 am, after thoroughly searching the house and confiscating 
computers and mobile phones, the men arrested Mr. Al Tajer and took him to an 
unknown destination. After his arrest, Mr. Al Tajer was detained incommunicado 
for five weeks and was then allegedly transferred to the Gurain military prison. 

 
In addition, Mr. Al Tajer appeared before the Lower National Safety Court on June 
12, 16 and 23, 2011 and could only meet with his family and lawyer on these 
occasions.
 
On June 23, 2011, Mr. Mohamed Issa Al Tajer appeared before the Lower 
National Safety Court in Manama on four charges: “inciting others to develop 
hatred or hostility towards the system of Government” pursuant to Article 165 of 
the Bahraini Criminal Code; “deliberately releasing malicious news or rumours 
about (…) the State” pursuant to Article 168; “inciting others (…) to hate or 
show contempt for a certain faction (…) undermining the public peace” pursuant 
to Article 172; and “taking part in a demonstration (…) with the aim of 
committing crimes (…) aimed at undermining public security” pursuant to Article 
178 punishable by a prison sentence of up to three years. Mr. Al Tajer was 
blamed for committing all those crimes because he reportedly made a speech in 
which he addressed the public in the Pearl Roundabout’s last March to denounce 
Bahrain's human rights record. In the charge sheet against him, it was stated by 
the prosecution that by making such speech he jeopardised the country stability 
and security and caused the public to reject the National Dialogue, which was 
then called for by the Government. 
 
The verdict in this trial was to be issued on July 5, 2011, but 
shortly before that date, on June 26, the authorities announced that all 
remaining court cases will be transferred from the special military courts to 
civilian courts. Thus, Mr. Al Tajer's trial was suspended and transferred to 
civil courts. 
 
Actions requested: The Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to: 

 
i.         
Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Mohamed 
Issa Al Tajer and all human rights defenders in Bahrain; 
 
ii.       
Put an end to any acts of harassment, including at the judicial 
level, against Mr. Mohamed Issa Al Tajer and against all human rights defenders 
in Bahrain; 
iii.      
Conform in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration 
on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations 
General Assembly, in particular : its Article 1, which states that “everyone 
has the right, individually or in association with others, to promote the 
protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the 
national and international levels” ;
-          its Article 6 (c) which states that “everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others to study, discuss, form and hold 
opinions on the observance, both in law and in practice, of all human rights and 
fundamental freedoms and, through these and other appropriate means, to draw 
public attention to those matters” ;
-          its Article 9.3 which provides that “everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others, inter alia […] to attend public 
hearings, proceedings and trials so as to form an opinion on their compliance 
with national law and applicable international obligations and commitments; and 
to offer and provide professionally qualified legal assistance or other relevant 
advice and assistance in defending human rights and fundamental 
freedoms” ;
-          its Article 10 which provides that “no one shall participate, by act 
or by failure to act where required, in violating human rights and fundamental 
freedoms and no one shall be subjected to punishment or adverse action of any 
kind for refusing to do so”;
-          and its Article 12.2 which states that “the State shall take all 
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of 
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, 
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or 
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of 
the rights referred to in the present Declaration”.
 
vi.    Ensure in all 
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance 
with international human rights standards and international instruments ratified 
by Bahrain. 
Addresses: 
·         
Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 
587
·         
Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tel: 
+973 172 27 555; Fax : +973 172 12 6032 
·         
Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and Islamic 
Affairs, Tel: +973 175 31 333; Fax: +973 175 31 284 
·         
Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the United Nations in Geneva, 1 
chemin Jacques-Attenville, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, CP 39, 1292 Chambésy, 
Switzerland. Fax: 
+ 41 22 758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch

 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of Bahrain in your 
respective countries.
 
*** 
Paris-Geneva, August 9, 2011 
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this 
appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the 
protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in 
their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 
29 