Bahrain:  Open Letter to the Parliament regarding the bill presented by the Government to reform the law on associations
April  8, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2013 / AprilBahrain: Open Letter to the Parliament regarding the bill presented by the Government to reform the law on associations

BAHRAIN: Open Letter to
the Parliament
regarding the bill presented by the Government to reform the law on
associations
 
Attn. HE
Khalifa bin Ahmed Al-Dhahrani, Chairman of the Council of Representatives
 
cc. HE Fatma  Al-Balushi, Minister of Social Development
 
HE Dr. Salah bin Ali
Abdulrahman, Minister of Human Rights Affairs
 
Paris-Geneva,
April 3, 2013
 
Re: The bill presented by the Government to
reform the law on associations falls short of universal human rights standards
 
Excellencies, Dear members of Parliament,
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), expresses its deepest concerns regarding the Draft Law on Civil
Associations and Organisations currently before Parliament, which, if
adopted, would further extend the capacity of the Government to interfere with
the activities of non-governmental organisations (NGOs), including human rights
NGOs, and thus further undermine human rights protection in Bahrain.
 
The Kingdom of Bahrain
has ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),
which in its Article 22 provides that “Everyone shall have the right to freedom
of association with others” and is legally bound to respect and protect this
right. 
 
The right to freedom of
association is a fundamental right, which plays a vital role in the promotion
and protection of all human rights and the promotion of the rule of law and
democratic principles. Any infringement of freedom of association undermines
the respect of all other human rights. It should be recalled that while some
restrictions may be imposed, freedom should remain the rule and restrictions the
exception. In its General Comment No. 27 (1999), the UN Human Rights Council
stipulated that “in adopting laws providing for restrictions […] States
should always be guided by the principle that the restrictions must not impair
the essence of the right […]; the relation between right and restriction,
between norm and exception, must not be reversed”. When, therefore, States
contemplate a restriction of such rights, they must be sure to comply with the
above conditions. Any restriction must therefore be motivated by one of the
interests specified, be on firm legal grounds (i.e. imposed “in accordance with
the law”, which implies that the law must be accessible and that it is
sufficiently precisely worded), and be “necessary in a democratic society”.
 
Our organisations are
concerned that the current bill was drafted in an attempt to further stifle
civil society organisations, in particular human rights NGOs.
 
Today, human rights
NGOs' right to freedom of association is regulated under Law 21 of 1989 for “societies”
(االجمعيات), which
according to local NGOs, constitutes one of the main obstacles hindering their
work. It gives the Minister of Social Development the right to replace board
members and directors of associations, to prohibit associations from engaging
in so-called “political activities”, to reject an application for establishing
any association “if [Bahraini] society doesn’t need its service” and to
dissolve the association. It has been indeed used to take over several
associations over the past two years including the doctors association, and to
dissolve the teachers association[1].
Over the past years, human rights defenders have been calling for a new law
that guarantee the right to freedom of association in accordance with
international standards by local and international human rights organisations.
This call was made again during the review of Bahrain under the Universal
Periodic Review (UPR) in May 2012 and Bahrain accepted to implement the
corresponding recommendation[2].  
 
The Draft Law on Civil Associations
and Organisations, which was adopted by the Government and referred in its
initial form to the Parliament on January 7, 2013, is still being reviewed in
Parliament though strong opposition was voiced by 20 local NGOs in a public
letter dated March 4, 2013[3].
Contrary to recommendations made by NGOs as well as some UN mechanisms, the
provisions of the current draft law contravenes international standards and
among others would give the Minister of Social Development the power to unduly
“supervise” and “interfere with the internal management and activities of
NGOs”, including human rights NGOs. 
 
The right to form
associations hindered:
 
- Ambiguous criteria for
registration
 
Pursuant to Article 22
of the ICCPR, everyone should be able to benefit from the right to create an
association, without any kind of discrimination. Any restrictions must comply
with States' international human rights obligations as blanket restrictions
shall not be considered lawful. Article 22.2 provides that “[n]o restrictions
may be placed on the exercise of this right other than those which are
prescribed by law and which are necessary in a democratic society in the
interests of national security or public safety, public order (ordre public),
the protection of public health or morals or the protection of the rights and
freedoms of others”. While certain restrictions may be imposed, freedom of
association should be the rule and restrictions the exception. In its current
form, the bill contains several wide-ranging provisions which would potentially
impair the essence of the right and reverse the relation between right and
exception.
 
Article 2 of the draft
law provides that it is “prohibited to establish an organisation/association on
sectarian basis or to achieve items that violate the constitution
and legislations, or public and moral order, or if its activities are political,
business, or for profit”. In a context where human rights defenders and NGOs
critical of the authorities for their human rights record are accused of conducting
political activities or of fuelling “sectarian” hatred, such provisions could
be used to unduly hamper human rights work. Indeed, criteria for registration
included in the bill are ambiguous enough to allow authorities broad discretion
in their interpretation.
 
Furthermore, Article
8 states that “the Minister (of Social Development) has the right to reject
the request of registration of an organisation if the society is not in
need of its services, or if the request violates the provisions
of this law, or it was intended to revive/incorporate another
organisation that was previously dissolved”. This provision is also
ambiguous and is a direct violation of the freedom of association, as it grants
power to the Minister to interpret whether an NGO may serve the needs of
society or not. 
 
Finally, under Article
7, the law would forbid individuals to be members of more than one group
doing similar work, unless the ministry approves.
 
Also, under Article 7,
the law would forbid creation of any organisation that is based on the
objectives underlying the trade unions. This automatically make the
associations of “doctors”, “nursing” and “teachers” illegal, at time the labour
law forbids forming trade unions for employees in the public (governmental)
sector. These associations were last resort to have a form of trade-union-like
association for the public service employees. 

 
- Lack of independence
of registration authorities
 
It is crucial that the
reviewing body be independent from the Government to ensure the fairness of the
registration process. 
 
In the current bill, Article
6 provides that “the registration request is submitted to the Ministry
of Social Development”, a political body. 
 
Over-arching
interference in the operation and management of associations:
 
Under the current bill,
Bahraini NGOs would not be allowed to carry out their activities freely due to
the capacity of the Government to interfere in decision-making and activities
at all stages of the operation and management of the NGO: from regulating the
thorough details of internal functioning and administration to tight
supervision of the association's funding, membership and dissolution. Ministry
employees would be entitled to search and inspect NGO premises and arrests
their members in case of violation (Article 13).
 
Prior ministerial
approval would be required at almost all stages:
 
- to
join/participate/cooperate/affiliate with foreign organisations (Article 16)
- to issue any
publications (Article 18)
- to receive domestic
and foreign funds/donations and to conduct fund-raising (Article 17)
- to open/close a bank
account (Article 50)
- to donate funds to
foreign organisations (Article 52)
- to invest funds or
perform any financial transactions (Article 55) 
- to invite foreigners
to attend conferences, workshops, activities in Bahrain (Article 88)
 
The Minister may also
interfere in the management of NGOs in the following manner:
 
- hire a manager or a
temporary board to run the board in some cases (Article 20)
- merge NGOs working on
the same goals (Article 22) – this is one of the most serious threats to the
independence of NGOs, as the minister would have the capacity to merge an
independent NGO with a another NGO which is less critical of the authorities
- attend general
assemblies (Article 27) 
- receive minutes and
decisions of general assemblies (Article 28) 
- cancel elections of
executive board members (Article 41)
- issue a unified guide
on financial and administrative policies for civil society organisations, that
the organisation must follow in their preparation of its annual budget (Article
54)
- suspend the Board or
manager or any of its members (Article 82)
 
Administrative and
judicial harassment: from suspension to dissolution:
 
The right to freedom of
association applies for the entire life of the association. The suspension and
the involuntarily dissolution of an association are the severest types of restrictions on freedom of association. As a result, it
should only be possible when there is a clear and imminent danger resulting in a flagrant violation of
national law, in compliance with
international human rights law. It should be strictly proportional to the
legitimate aim pursued and used only
when softer measures would be insufficient.
 
Under the current bill,
the Minister may initiate legal proceedings against NGOs for even minor
infringements or suspend them without appropriate remedies (Article 58). Such
infringements include:
 
- spending funds in
wrong manner
- inability to achieve
its goals/ the violation of these goals
- conduct activities
based on ethnicity/sectarian nature
- gross violation of the
law/statute
- gathering/sending of
funds inside/outside Bahrain in violation of the law
-
joining/participating/affiliating to a foreign organisation without the consent
of the ministry
 
The current draft law
introduces a new form of dissolution through the involuntary merging with
another association (assumingly working for the same goal), under Article 22
which leave it to the Minister to decide on the conditions and the mechanism of
the merge and which force the merged associations to submit all its records to
the new association.
 
NGO members subject to
State-sanctioned persecution and discrimination:
 
- Criminal sanctions for
unregistered activities
 
The right to freedom of
association equally protects associations
that are not registered. Individuals involved in unregistered associations
should indeed be free to carry out any
activities, including the right to hold and participate in peaceful assemblies, and should not be subject to criminal sanctions.
Under the current bill, individuals are liable to criminal responsibility for
operating unregistered NGOs (Article 87) and they face prison and fines
punishments. 
 
- Criminal sanction for
unauthorised activities 
 
Under the current bill,
the Minister may initiate legal proceedings against human rights defenders for
conducting unauthorised activities or committing specific offences, such as
(Article 87): 
 
- establishing a body
that conducts activities of a civil organisation/institution without compliance
of the law
- purposely giving false
data or hiding data
- conducting activities
before the registration announcement in the official gazette; or after the
decision/verdict of its dissolution
- conducting activities
that exceed the purpose for it was established / or spending funds for purposes
other than those authorised/ or misusing funds
- allowing non-members
to participate in the general assembly meetings of the organisation
- participating in an
activity with an organisation that was dissolved after the decision was
published in the official gazette
- collecting donations
in violation of the law
- receiving/sending
funds to/from abroad
- inviting foreign
persons to attend activities of the organisation without the approval of the
minister
- refusing to give in
documents/funds to the incorporated organisation
- refusing to give in
documents/funds to the appointed manager/committee
 
The Draft Law on Civil
Associations and Organisations adopted by the government would significantly
undermine what few human rights independent non-governmental associations have
under the country’s current law. 
 
The
Observatory considers that the adoption of this draft law would blatantly
violate international instruments on human rights that guarantee freedom of
association, in particular the ICCPR, the Universal Declaration on Human Rights
and the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the United Nations
General Assembly on December 9, 1998. More specifically, the Observatory highlights
that the bill as drafted would violate the following articles of the UN
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, and in particular: 
 
-
Article 5(b): For the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in association
with others, at the national and international levels: (…) (b) To form, join
and participate in non-governmental organizations, associations or groups; (c)
To communicate with non-governmental or intergovernmental organisations.
 
-
Article 5(c): For the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in association
with others, at the national and international levels: (…) (c) To communicate
with non-governmental or intergovernmental organisations.
 
-
Article 13: Everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to solicit, receive and utilize resources for the express purpose of
promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms through peaceful
means, in accordance with article 3 of the present Declaration.
 
Accordingly,
the Observatory respectfully requests Members of Parliament to vote down the
bill mentioned above, and to prevent any other bill or initiative that would limit
the right to freedom of association.
 
In
addition, the Observatory calls upon the Bahraini authorities, including the
Parliament and the Government, to consult, throughout the drafting process of
the bill, with civil society organisations and all concerned parties, and to
amend the bill and to conform, in any circumstances, with the constitutional
right to establish civil society organisations and international standards
regarding freedom of association, in particular the provisions of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights (Article 20) and those of Article 5(b) of the UN
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders. 
 
We express our sincere
hope that you will take these considerations and requests into account, 
 
Yours sincerely,
 



Souhayr
  Belhassen
FIDH President


Gerald
  Staberock
OMCT Secretary General



 



[1] For more
information see FIDH and Arab Institute for Human Rights (AIHR) Report on
Freedom of Association in Bahrain, Kuwait and Yemen, available at: http://www.fidh.org/Freedom-of-Association-Report-on


[2] To consult
the UPR outcome report on Bahrain:
http://daccess-ods.un.org/TMP/1878962.51678467.html


[3] See
http://www.alayam.com/newsdetails.aspx?id=135641&de=1 