Azerbaijan:  Time for justice in the case against Leyla and Arif Yunus
October 16, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Azerbaijan / 2015 / OctoberAzerbaijan: Time for justice in the case against Leyla and Arif Yunus

Geneva-Paris, October 16, 2015 – The appeal trial in the case
against Ms. Leyla and Mr. Arif Yunus opened before the Baku Grave Crimes Court
on October 12. On August 13, both had been convicted to 8.5 and 7 years jail sentences in a trial that grossly disregarded
international standards of fair trial and due process. As the appeal trial is
unfolding, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
(OMCT-FIDH programme) calls for these outrageous sentences to be nullified.

On October 12, the Baku Appeal Court had adjourned the case
against Ms. Leyla Yunus and Mr. Arif Yunusov toto October 15 after 15
minutes, since Ms. Yunus had received the translation of  the charges-sheet  on the day of the session itself. Ms. Yunus
is not fluent in Azeri, therefore all trial documents are being translated into
Russian.
 
On October 15, the trial resumed with the presence of
diplomats, representatives of local and international human rights
organisations and international trial observers, including one mandated by the
Observatory. 
 
At the start of the hearing, Mr. Arif Yunus was placed into
a glass cabin. Ms. Yunus was then brought into the room, and appeared very
weak. She  nonetheless managed to
denounce the absence of medical treatment she desperately needs, highlighting
that German doctor Christian Witt, who examined her in December 2014, had
prescribed a her a two-month treatment in jail hospital, yet she was actually
allowed to spend only 6 days in hospital and has not received the required
treatments since then. She spoke emotionally, was extremely anxious and
resisted guards who did not allow her to speak and tried to take her into the
cabin. All the observers in the room stood up as a sign of solidarity with Ms.
Yunus. The judge requested silence, and ordered an opposition leader present in
the room to be taken out.
 
The judge  then started the hearing and approved a
motion filed by defence lawyer Mr. Elchin
Sadiqov to postpone the hearing because he needed time to study court
protocols and documents. The judge accepted his request and the trial was
re-scheduled to 3:00pm on October 20, 2015. The October-15 hearing therefore
lasted only 7 minutes, in a noisy environment. It is worth noting that when the
judge was speaking, Ms. Yunus complained that she could not hear him from the
glass cabin where she and her husband were held.
 
“If this was a democracy
with any remote semblance of a rule of law there could be only one reasonable
course of action: release, immediate medical treatment and the opening of an
investigation into those who neglected their duty to care. Instead we see the
continuation of a judicial farce in the heart of Europe. We cannot let the authorities
go away with this”,
said OMCT Secretary General, Gerald Staberock.
 
“Yesterday's hearing confirms once again that the right to
medical treatment of the Yunus couple is being blatantly violated as their
health condition remains critical. We urge the
authorities to put an end to this unbearable situation and release them
immediately as their detention clearly aims at sanctioning their human rights
activities”,
concluded FIDH President, Karim Lahidji.
 
Background information
 
Ms. Leyla Yunus, Director of the Institute for Peace
and Democracy (IPD) and a member of OMCT General Assembly, and Mr. Arif
Yunusov, Chief of IPD's department of conflictology, were arrested as part
of a large crackdown targeting human rights defenders and civil society which began
in the summer of 2014. Ms. Leyla Yunus was charged with “state treason”, “large
scale fraud”, “illegal business” through extraction of income in large scale,
“large scale tax invasion, fake manufacturing or selling of other official
documents” and “use of fake documents”. Mr. Arif Yunus was charged with “fraud”
and “state treason”. The couple faced one year of pre-trial detention during
which the deterioration of their health was appalling and during which their
requests for access to the necessary medical treatment were denied multiple
times. 
 
The Observatory recalls that very similar and equally
politically motivated sentences were already upheld in July 2015 after the
appeal trials of human rights defenders Mr. Intigam Aliyev and Mr. Rasul
Jafarov, who are currently serving 7.5 and 6.2 years in prison,
respectively. Moreover, the appeal trial regarding the sentencing of prominent
investigative journalist Ms. Khadija
Ismayilova to 7.5 years in prison is currently taking place in Baku, with
the first hearing held on October 15, on the same day as the Yunus couple. 
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme is
to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. 