Azerbaijan:  Assault against the son of two women human rights defenders
August  7, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2013 / AugustAzerbaijan: Assault against the son of two women human rights defenders

AZE
001 / 0813 / OBS 071
Assault
Azerbaijan
August 7, 2013
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Azerbaijan.
 
Brief description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by the Institute for Peace and Democracy
(IPD) about the assault against the son of Ms. Matanat
Azizova,
Head of the Women’s Crisis Center (WCC) and Deputy Director of the IPD, and
grandson of Ms. Mirvari Gahramanly, Head of the Committee to Protect Oil Industry Workers’ Rights.
 
According to the information
received, in the evening of July 19, 2013, two men came up to Mr. Jamal Azizov,
17 year-old, as he was near his house. They took him rudely by his shoulder,
and reportedly “advised” him to tell his mother and grandmother - namely Ms.
Matanat Azizova and Ms. Mirvari Gahramanly - “how to speak in the press”.
Allegedly, they threatened to cut his tongue off to silence his mother.
Finally, they beat the boy black and blue on his shoulder and neck.
 
The
Observatory condemns the assault against Mr. Jamal Azizov as well as the
alleged threats against Ms. Matanat Azizova and Ms. Mirvari Gahramanly, and
fears they are an attempt to silence the two women’s
efforts to report on human rights violations. Recently, Ms. Gahramanly has indeed
published several articles and interviews about the violation of
women’s rights and sexual harassment within the State Oil Company,
and Ms. Azizova has gathered information for IPD about the violation of
property rights by Baku executive power and the State Oil Company.
 
Accordingly,
the Observatory calls upon the authorities of Azerbaijan to order an immediate, thorough, effective and impartial investigation into
those events in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before a
civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal sanctions provided by
the law.
 
Background
information:
 
In November 2012, after Zerkalo
newspaper released an interview of Ms. Matanat Azizova about human trafficking
in Azerbaijan, Ms. Azizova was assaulted and beat up by an unknown man at the
entrance of her house. The mass media gave a wide coverage to this event. As a
consequence, the first Deputy Minister Vilayyet Eyvazov met with Ms. Azizova
and promised to order a thorough investigation of the case, saying that the
case was under control of the Minister of Internal Affairs. However, despite a
few investigative experiments and the photofit of an assaulter, the case has
remained unsolved. 
 
Moreover, although Ms. Azizova
initially wanted to lodge a complaint to the police following the recent attack
against her son and to denounce the impunity following her previous assault,
she finally renounced doing so after she was told by the investigator who had
the responsibility to conduct the investigation into the assault against her in
2012 that he had never investigated the said assault. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Azerbaijan urging them to:
i.    Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and
psychological integrity of Ms. Matanat Azizova, Ms. Mirvari Gahramanly, their relatives as well
as of all human rights defenders and
their families in Azerbaijan;
 
ii.   Order an immediate, thorough, effective and
impartial investigation into the above-mentioned events in order to identify
all those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial
tribunal and apply the penal sanctions provided by the law;
 
iii. Put an end to any kind of harassment against all
human rights defenders in Azerbaijan;
 
iv.  Comply with all the provisions of the Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations
General Assembly, in particular:
-    its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right,
individually or in association with others, to promote the protection and realization
of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international
levels”, 
-    Article 12.1, which foresees that “everyone has the right,
individually and in association with others, to participate in peaceful
activities against violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms”,
-    and its Article 12.2 which provides that “the State shall take all
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence,
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise
of the rights referred to in the present Declaration.”
 
v. Guarantee the respect of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and other international human rights instruments ratified by Azerbaijan.
 
Addresses: 
 
·    
Mr.
Ilham Aliyev, President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Office of the President
of the Republic of Azerbaijan, 19 Istiqlaliyyat St., Baku AZ1066, Azerbaijan,
Fax: +994 12 492 06 25, +994 412 92 28 68, E-mail: office@pa.gov.az, office@apparat.gov.az 
·    
Mr. Ramil Usubov, Minister of
Internal Affairs of the Azerbaijani Republic, Ministry of Internal Affairs, 7 Azerbaijan ave., AZ 1001, Baku, Azerbaijan. Fax: + 994 12 492 45 90. Email: info@mia.gov.az 
·    
H.E. Mr. Murad
N. Najafbayli, Ambassador, Permanent
Mission of the Republic of Azerbaijan to the United Nations in Geneva, Route des Fayards 237, 1290 Versoix, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 901 18 44. E-mail: geneva@mission.mfa.gov.az 
·    
H.E. Mr. Fuad Isgandarov, Ambassador, Mission of the Republic
of Azerbaijan to the European Union, Avenue Moliere 464, 1050 Brussels,
Belgium. Fax: +32 2 345 91 58. Email: office@azembassy.be
 
Please also write to the
diplomatic missions or embassies of Azerbaijan in your respective country as well as to the EU diplomatic missions or embassies in Azerbaijan.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, August 7, 2013
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal
in your reply.
 
The Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the protection
of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time
of need.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
·      
Email: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·      
Tel and fax
OMCT: + 41 22 809 49 39 / 41 22 809 49 29
·      
Tel and fax
FIDH: +33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / 01 43 55 18 80 