Lebanon:  Lebanon has to criminalize torture! A call to the Lebanese Deputies
December  2, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Lebanon / 2013 / DecemberLebanon: Lebanon has to criminalize torture! A call to the Lebanese DeputiesPR Lebanon has to criminalize torture. A call to the Lebanese Deputies2 pages / 464 KB

As we
approach the International Human Rights Day on December 10, our organizations
join efforts to call again upon the Lebanese authorities to criminalize the
practice of torture.
Lebanon
ratified the Convention against Torture in 2000 and reaffirmed its resolve to
combat torture when acceding to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against
Torture in 2008. However, the practice of torture still prevails. 
Every year,
hundreds of persons are tortured during the investigations or in detention
places, for various reasons, and their lives remain forever altered by this
traumatizing experience.
Curbing
down the practice of torture in Lebanon will never achieve results as long as
the perpetrators are not properly prosecuted and punished.
Right now,
the Lebanese legislation does not include a comprehensive definition of the
crime of torture and fails to provide for appropriate punishment for those who
commit torture. 
Our
organizations call upon the Members of the Parliament in Lebanon to enact the draft
law on torture criminalization that has been under study by the Law and
Administration Committee of the Parliament since December 2012 in a timely
manner. We call on them as well to complete this process in the most
transparent way, especially if substantial changes are to be introduced to the
initial proposal.

According
to the Convention against Torture, the term “torture” means any act by which
severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally
inflicted on a person for such purposes as obtaining from him or a third person
information or a confession, punishing him for an act he or a third person has
committed or is suspected of having committed, or intimidating or coercing him
or a third person, or for any reason based on discrimination of any kind, when
such pain or suffering is inflicted by or at the instigation of or with the
consent or acquiescence of a public official or other person acting in an
official capacity. It does not include pain or suffering arising only form,
inherent in or incidental to lawful sanctions.
In addition
to criminalizing torture in order to put an end to this inhumane practice, the
law needs to reinforce the rule of law. Ceasing a culture of impunity among
state institutions will allow human dignity to be upheld by duty bearers
Beirut, December
2, 2013
Signatories:
- Lebanese
Center for Human Rights (CLDH), 
- Centre
Nassim for the rehabilitation of victims of torture, 
- ALEF –
Act for Human Rights
- Justice
and Mercy Association (AJEM)
- Alkarama
Foundation
- Restart
Center for the rehabilitation of victims of violence and torture

- World Organization Against Torture
(OMCT)
 
 
This press conference is part of the campaign
entitled “Nothing can justify torture” conducted by the World Organization
Against Torture (OMCT). 