Thailand:  Decision to withdraw all charges against Ms. Pornpen Khongkachonkiet, Mr. Somchai Homlaor and Ms. Anchana Heemmina
March  9, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2017 / MarchThailand: Decision to withdraw all charges against Ms. Pornpen Khongkachonkiet, Mr. Somchai Homlaor and Ms. Anchana Heemmina





New
information
THA 003 /
0816 / OBS 066.1
Judicial
harassment
Thailand
March 9, 2017
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
Thailand.
 
New information:

The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources of the decision by the
Thai army’s Internal Security Operations Command (ISOC)[1]
to withdraw all charges against Ms. Pornpen Khongkachonkiet, Chair of
Amnesty International Thailand and Director of the Cross Cultural Foundation
(CrCF)[2], Mr. Somchai
Homlaor, a prominent lawyer and senior legal advisor to CrCF, and Ms. Anchana Heemmina,
founder and Director of the organization Duay
Jai Group (Hearty Support
Group)[3],
prosecuted for co-editing the report “Torture and Ill-treatment in the Deep South Documented in 2014-2015”, published by CrCF, Duay
Jai Group, and Patani Human Rights Organization Network (HAP) on February 10,
2016[4].
 
According to the information received, on March 7,
2017, Col. Pramote Promin, a spokesman for ISOC 4,
announced during a press conference that the ISOC would drop a criminal
defamation lawsuit and charges under the Computer Crimes Act against the three
defenders over the 2016 torture report (See Background information). The
spokesman claimed that both parties agreed to: 1) set up a joint fact-finding
committee to review allegations of human rights violations; 2) create
appropriate preventive measures and remedial approaches to human rights
violations; and 3) submit future human rights reports to the newly created
joint committee for review.
 
The
Observatory welcomes the Thai army’s decision, which takes place a few days
before the United Nations Human Rights Committee (CCPR) is set to review
Thailand on March 13 and 14, 2017, but condemns the judicial harassment to which Ms. Pornpen Khongkachonkiet, Mr. Somchai Homlaor and Ms. Anchana Heemmina were subjected, as it was
clearly aimed at hindering their peaceful human rights activities.
The Observatory calls upon the Thai authorities to put an end to all acts of judicial
harassment against them and all human rights defenders in Thailand.
 
Background information:
 
On June 26, 2016, Ms.
Pornpen, Ms. Anchana, and Mr. Somchai were summoned by police at the Pattani
Police Station following a complaint filed against them on June 8 by the ISOC
4. However, the police interrogation was postponed until July 26, 2016.

On July 26, 2016,
officers from the Pattani Police Station charged Ms. Pornpen, Ms. Anchana, and
Mr. Somchai with “criminal defamation” under Articles 326[5] and 328[6] of the Criminal Code and
“computer-related crimes” under Article 14.1[7] of the 2007 Computer Crimes
Act for allegedly publishing and uploading false information to the Internet in
connection with the aforementioned report. The three human rights defenders
denied all charges and police allowed them to submit a written statement in
their defence within 60 days. The three faced up to five years in prison and a
fine of 200,000 baht (approximately 5,360 euros) if they had been convicted.
 
Before publishing the
report, the three human right defenders tried to engage with the authorities
concerning the alleged cases of torture and ill-treatment documented in the
report. They sent the report to Lt. Gen. Wiwat Pathompak, Commander of the 4th
Army Region, on January 8, 2016. However, the high-ranking military officers
publicly denied the accuracy of the report and questioned the reliability of
the civil society organisations that produced it.
 
In addition, after the
release of the report, seven ISOC officers summoned Ms. Anchana to appear for
questioning in relation to its publication at the Sirinthon Army Camp in Yala
Province, for two and half hours. The officers conveyed their discontent with the report and requested
that in the future she submit all of her publications to ISOC before they are
released, which Ms. Anchana refused.
 
On February 19, 2016, at
about 5pm, a group of 10 uniformed men visited Ms. Anchana’s home, finding
there only her mother. They claimed to be border police officers, and without
presenting a warrant questioned Ms. Anchana’s mother about her daughter and
reportedly took pictures of her and the house.
 
This
is also not the first time Ms. Pornpen has faced charges for documenting
torture. In September 2014, Ms. Pornpen was charged with “criminal defamation”
by Army Task Force 41 in connection with her documentation and advocacy work
concerning allegations of army torture in Thailand’s ‘Deep South’. The case was
eventually dropped by the State Prosecutor in June 2015.
 
Actions requested: 

Please write to the authorities of Thailand asking them to: 

i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Pornpen Khongkachonkiet,
Ms. Anchana Heemmina, and Mr. Somchai Homlaor, as well as of all human rights
defenders in Thailand;

ii. Put an end to all acts of judicial harassment against them and all human
rights defenders in Thailand;

iii. Put an end to all acts of torture and ill-treatment in the country,
properly investigate them, and prosecute perpetrators, in compliance with
Thailand’s international human rights commitments.
 
iv. Conform to the
provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the
General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially its
Articles 1 and 12.2; 

v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Thailand.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
Gen
Prayuth Chan-ocha, Prime Minister of Thailand, Fax: +66 (0) 2 282 5131
·    
Don
Pramudwinai, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax: +66 (0) 2 643 5320; Email: minister@mfa.go.th
·    
Mr.
Suwaphan Tanyuvardhana, Minister of Justice, Fax: +66 (0) 2 953 0503
·    
Pol
Gen Chakthip Chaijinda, Commissioner-General of the Royal Thai Police, Fax: +66
(0) 2 251 5956 / +66 (0) 2 251 8702
·    
Mr.
Wat Tingsamit, Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission of Thailand;
Email: help@nhrc.or.th
·    
H.E. Mr. Thani Thongphakdi,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission
of Thailand to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: + 41 22 715 10
00 / 10 02; Email: mission.thailand@ties.itu.int
·    
H.E.
Ms. Busaya Mathelin, Ambassador, Embassy of Thailand in
Brussels, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 648 30 66; Email: thaibxl@thaiembassy.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic
mission or embassy of Thailand in your respective country.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, March 9, 2017 
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH
partnership, is dedicated to the protection of human rights defenders and aims
to offer them concrete support in their time of need. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union
Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.




[1] The Internal Security Operations Command
(ISOC) is a unit of the Thai military devoted to national security. ISOC 4 is
responsible for security operations in the southern provinces.


[2] Cross Cultural Foundation (CrCF) is an organization that
monitors and documents cases of torture and ill-treatment in Thailand. 


[3] Duay Jai Group is
an organization that provides rehabilitation services for victims of torture
and support for their families.


[4] The report concerns 54 allegations of torture and
ill-treatment committed by the Royal Thai police and Royal Thai army against
members of the Muslim Malay minority arrested for their alleged involvement
with insurgent groups in the conflictive southern region of the country,
between 2014 and 2015.


[5] Article 326 of the Criminal Code states: “Whoever, imputes
anything to the other person before a third person in a manner likely
to impair the reputation of such other person or to expose such other
person to be hated or scorned, is said to commit defamation, and shall be
punished with imprisonment not exceeding one year or fined not exceeding
twenty thousand baht, or both.”


[6] Article 328 of the
Criminal Code states: “If the offence of
defamation be committed by means of publication of a document, drawing,
painting, cinematography film, picture or letters made visible by any means,
gramophone record or any other recording instruments, recording picture or
letters, or by broadcasting or spreading picture, or by propagation by any
other means, the offender shall be punished with imprisonment not exceeding two
years and fined not exceeding two hundred thousand baht.”


[7] Article 14.1 of the Computer Crimes Act states: “Whoever commits the
following offences, shall be punished with imprisonment not exceeding five
years or a fine not exceeding on hundred thousand baht or both: (1) input, into
computer system, forged computer data in whole or in part or false computer
data in a manner likely to cause injury to another person or the public.” 