Mexico:  "In Defense of Life": Civil Observation Mission Report on the situation of Human Rights Defenders in Mexico 2015
September 29, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Reports and Publications / Mexico / 2015 / SeptemberMexico: "In Defense of Life": Civil Observation Mission Report on the situation of Human Rights Defenders in Mexico 2015Mexico_2015.09_Report_Español-English135 pages / 2.39 MB​






The report is available here in both English and Spanish: Mexico_2015.09_Report_Español-English
From November 9th to 14th, 2014, a Civil Observation Mission (MOC in Spanish) composed
of five women who are independent experts in human rights from the Americas and
from Europe visited Mexico to analyze the situation for human rights defenders
in the country.
The information published by national and international organizations
reflects a strong climate of hostility against human rights defenders in Mexico
and the goal of the MOC was to gather and verify this information and
contribute to the improvement of the situation for the community of human
rights defenders.
The MOC was organized by 11 national and international organizations, including OMCT and FIDH, in the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, and held
meetings with civil society, authorities from the three levels of government,
mem- bers of the Consultative Council of the Protection Mechanism for Human
Rights Defenders and Journalists (Protection Mechanism), diplomatic
representatives of the European Union (EU), and with the Office in Mexico of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR). The MOC carried
out their work in the states of Guerrero, Oaxaca, Baja California and Mexico
City.
The states that the MOC visited share several characteristics regarding the
situation for human rights defenders: Guerrero and Oaxaca are the states that
recorded the greatest number of aggressions to human rights defenders
defenders; Mexico
City, one of the main places that receives displaced defenders, is the
political center of the country and is home to institutions that can provide
them with protection. The situation in Baja California was identified as a
paradigmatic case in the north of the country that has not been highlighted in
recent research. States such as Chihuahua and Coahuila in the north have high
rates of attacks on human rights defenders as well, largely directed at women
human rights defenders, the relatives of the disappeared, and defenders of
migrants’ rights.
An invitation was sent to defenders in other states
to meet with and share information with the MOC. In addition to visiting the
states listed above, the MOC received reports from organizations and defenders
from the states of Veracruz, State of Mexico, Quintana Roo, Jalisco, Sonora,
and Tabasco.
In total, the MOC met with 30 different
organizations, collectives and civil society groups and with 15 independent
human rights defenders. Additionally, the MOC received written information from
another 7 organizations and 7 human rights de- fenders.
Moreover, the MOC also collected information
through interviews with authorities from Guerrero, Oaxaca, Baja California, and
Mexico City, as well as with representatives from the federal government. The
Ministry of Foreign Affairs (SRE in Spanish) and the Human Rights Commission
for the Federal District (CDHDF in Spanish) also sent additional information.
Other civil society actors also sent information as well.
On the whole the MOC was able to conduct the
interviews that they requested, however the MOC regrets that they were not able
to meet with the National Commission on Human Rights (CNDH in Spanish), especially
since they received important testimonies from civil society organizations
about its operation. MOC members hope that this will improve under the current
administration.                                            
This report is a compilation of the information
obtained in meetings and from documentation received by the five independent
experts who were part of the Mission.
The first part introduces the legal framework in
which human rights defenders operate. It highlights governmental policies to
promote and protect human rights that contrast with the backdrop of
vulnerability and risk faced by human rights defenders.
The second part of the report is divided into three
chapters that address the issues that impact and hinder the defense of human
rights: First, the criminalization of defenders that is fueled by a lack of
appropriate acknowledgement of their work in Mexican society (Chapter 1);
Protection mechanisms and how appropriate and effective they are for the
protection of human rights defenders, with special emphasis on the Protection
Mechanism for Human Rights Defenders and Journalists created in 2012 (Chapter
2); and the factors that contribute to impunity and prevent defenders from
carrying out their work (Chapter 3). It should be noted that the experts
received many complaints about an overall failure to effectively investigate
and prosecute the perpetrators who put the work of human rights defenders and
their emotional and physical integrity at risk.
Finally, the report includes the concluding remarks
and recommendations of the MOC in regard to the protection of human rights
defenders in Mexico.
The MOC thanks those defenders and journalists who
shared their testimonies, the authorities of the four states that the MOC
visited, and the federal government, the state-level entities, the
representatives from the EU and the OHCHR for their welcome and support.
In accordance with international obligations, the MOC
urges authorities to protect the individuals and organizations that contributed
to this mission from reprisals and retaliations, and to especially protect the
human rights defenders who were inter- viewed and who are mentioned in this
report.





The report is available here in both English and Spanish: Mexico_2015.09_Report_Español-English 