Russian Federation:  Press Release: Bill to criminalise cooperation with foreign organisations: a new threat to human rights work
January 19, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2015 / JanuaryRussian Federation: Press Release: Bill to criminalise cooperation with foreign organisations: a new threat to human rights workParis-Geneva,
19 January 2015 - The State Duma must drop the Bill on “undesirable foreign
organisations” that will be debated on January 20, said the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders today. If adopted, the law will complement
an already very restrictive legislative arsenal used to silence all forms of
criticism against the regime in contradiction with international human rights
instruments ratified by Russia and will allow authorities to ban legitimate
human rights activities, though they are protected under international law. 
 
On January 14, the State Duma Committee on Constitutional Legislation
recommended that the lower house pass a bill to ban “undesirable foreign
organisations” in Russia and ban cooperation with them. The bill, presented
initially by two members of Parliament, would allow the Prosecutor General’s
Office, upon consultation with the Foreign Ministry and based on information
provided by the interior and security agencies, to ban foreign and
international organisations that “threaten the defence or security of the
State” or “public order and health”.
 
“Countless human rights NGOs
and defenders have been criminalised by the authorities for allegedly
threatening security or public order. We fear that these vague terms will again
be used to criminalise legitimate human rights activities implemented by INGOs
in Russia”, said Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary
General. “A law that effectively criminalizes human contacts or institutional
partnerships with other human rights actors is indeed unprecedented”. 
 
Russian organisations have become over the last decades a vital and
proud part of a global movement participating in international meetings and
sharing their knowledge, experience and advice in global human rights networks
and federations. This law risks to isolate Russian activists and to break
international solidarity and support. 
 
Under the bill, the designation of a foreign or international
organisation as undesirable would be followed by the closure of branch offices
in Russia. It would also ban the distribution of information, including online.
 
Furthermore, individuals involved in the operation of an undesirable
foreign or international organisation in Russia would be fined between 10,000
and 100,000 Rubles (185 – 1,850 Euros). And the employees of an undesirable
organisation that continued to work in Russia could face criminal charges and
fines ranging between 300,000 and 500,000 Rubles (5,560 – 9,260 Euros) or up to
eight years in prison. If adopted, this measure would negatively impact the work of those who are
members of international NGOs in Russia and will make it impossible for human
rights defenders based abroad, should their organisation be registered as
“unwanted”, to enter Russia.
 
The Observatory recalls that, if adopted, this bill would add to an
already very restrictive legislation for civil society organisations further
shrinking the space for freedom of association in the country. In 2012 the
State Duma adopted a law that required NGOs to register as “foreign
agents” if they engaged in “political activity” and receive foreign funding.
Because “foreign agent” can be interpreted only as “spy” or “traitor”, such
label aims at discrediting NGOs and obstructing their working environment.
 
“Following the adoption of the
NGO law in 2012 which led to the registration of more than 30 prominent Russian
NGOs as foreign agents and the closing down of 4 others, including FIDH member
organisation ADC Memorial, it seems clear that this new bill will be used to
ban the presence of international human rights NGOs in Russia. Slowly but
surely, Putin is getting rid of all human rights organisations in the Russian
Federation”, said Karim
Lahidji, FIDH President.
 
The
Observatory, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), therefore opposes the possible adoption of
this bill on the strongest terms and calls for the State Duma to drop it.
 
Press contacts:
• FIDH: Arthur Manet /
Audrey Couprie:  +33 1 43 55 25 18
• OMCT:
Miguel Martin Zumalacarregui:  +41 22 809
49 24 