Myanmar (ex-Burma):  Press Release: Drop charges against Mandalay farmers and land rights defenders
August  8, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Myanmar (ex-Burma) / 2017 / AugustMyanmar (ex-Burma): Press Release: Drop charges against Mandalay farmers and land rights defendersDownload full article2 pages / 297 KB​

















THE OBSERVATORY - PRESS
RELEASE
Paris-Geneva-Bangkok, August 8, 2017 - Burmese authorities should
immediately drop all charges filed against 11 farmers and two land rights defenders
over a protest against land confiscation in Mandalay Region, the Observatory
(FIDH and OMCT) said today.
 
“Instead of prosecuting dispossessed
farmers, Burmese authorities should concentrate their efforts on addressing
their legitimate grievances. It’s crucial that the government adopts a humane
approach in the resolution of land disputes”, said ALTSEAN-Burma
Coordinator and FIDH Secretary-General Debbie Stothard.
 
On 23 October 2016, police arrested 11 farmers and activists
Toe Gyi and Myo Win, leaders of the
Mandalay-based Farmers Network Interest of Farmers and Labor (FNI-FL), for
their involvement in a plow protest (a form of protest where farmers continue
to till disputed land to signify their claim to ownership over it) on 8
October 2016 in Pyinsar Village, Pyin Oo Lwin Township, Mandalay Region. The
military began confiscating land in the area without compensation in 1998 and
then sold large tracts of it to private companies and business executives with
ties to the then ruling military junta for a coffee plantation project.
 
The arrest of the 13 stemmed from charges filed against them
by two private companies – Cooperative Bank and Ar-raw Gyan Pharmaceutical –
and local businessman Kyu Zin, who claim ownership of the land. The
complainants alleged that the plow protest had caused them to sustain financial
losses.
 
The 13 were charged on 24 October 2016 under Articles 114
(abetment), 353 (assault of a public servant), 392 (robbery), 427 (mischief),
447 (trespass), and 506 (intimidation) of the Criminal Code. After spending
four months in detention, they were granted bail on 23 February 2017. On 1 June
2017, Pyin Oo Lwin Township Court revoked their bail and issued arrest
warrants.
 
Over the past two years, local farmers have held protests
and set up makeshift tents on land plots in Pyin Oo Lwin Township to claim
their ownership of the land. In another case, on the night of 28 July 2017, police raided a sit-in
protest on 62nd Street in central Mandalay and arrested eight protest leaders
and three farmers. They were charged under Articles 19 and 20 of the Peaceful
Gathering and Demonstration Law, before being released on bail the next day.
Since June 2017, hundreds of farmers in Mandalay Region have protested and called
on the authorities to drop charges against farmers, release those who have been
arrested, and return confiscated farmland to its original owners. Nearly 500
villagers in central Mandalay Region are currently being prosecuted in cases
related to land confiscation.
 
The Observatory urges the Burmese authorities to ensure
farmers can fully exercise their right to freedom of peaceful assembly in line
with international standards. The two organizations also call on the government
to ratify the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
(ICESCR) as a matter of priority. Burma signed the ICESCR on 16 July 2015.
 
“Authorities must immediately
stop the criminalization of farmers and land rights defenders and the denial of
their right to freedom of peaceful assembly. The government must implement a
new approach that recognizes its duty to protect human rights and adjudicate
land disputes in a fair and responsible manner”, said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The
objective of this programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression
against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
For
more information, please contact:
•
FIDH: Audrey Couprie: +33 6 48 05 91 57
(Paris); Andrea Giorgetta: +66886117722 (Bangkok) 
•
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39
(Geneva)
·
ALTSEAN: Debbie Stothard:
+66816861652 (Bangkok) 