Nepal:  Follow-up_Mr. Gyan Bahadur Balami, Ms. Lama and Mr. Iman continue to be threatened and have still not been provided with adequate medical care_OMCT fears for their safety
December 24, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2010 / DecemberNepal: Follow-up_Mr. Gyan Bahadur Balami, Ms. Lama and Mr. Iman continue to be threatened and have still not been provided with adequate medical care_OMCT fears for their safety​Case NPL 031210.2/ NPL 031210.2.VAW
Follow-up of cases NPL
031210/ NPL 031210.VAW and NPL 031210.1/ NPL 031210.1.VAW
URGENT CAMPAIGNS/ VIOLENCE
AGAINST WOMEN
Threats/ Lack of adequate medical care/ Fear for
safety 
                                               
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) has received new information and requests
your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Nepal.
 
New information
 
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source and
Antenna International, a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, that Mr. Gyan Bahadur Balami (Gyanu), 36 years
old, permanent resident of Burtibang – 6, Baglung district and temporarily
living in Padampokhari VDC- 8, Hattigouda, Makwanpur district, his wife, Ms. Lama, 33 years old (name changed), and Mr. Iman, alias Makar Bahadur Gharti Magar, 41 years old, permanent
resident of Bobang-8, Baglung district and temporarily living in Goldhunga,
Sundar tole, Kathmandu district, continue to be threatened and have still not been
provided with adequate medical care. Furthermore, they remain detained in the
same detention centre where the alleged perpetrators are working. 
 
According to the information received, on 12 December 2010, Mr. Gyan Bahadur Balami, Ms.
Lama and Mr. Makar Bahadur Gharti Magar “Iman” were taken to the office room of
Inspector Humagai from the Crime Division. The inspector reportedly said to Ms.
Lama “You are a Malaysian woman. How could you accuse the police of tearing
your undergarments? How could you report such things to the human rights
activists? The Malaysian women might not feel shame but the Nepalese women
don’t say such things openly. We have received 5 pages letter. Do you want to
see?"
 
The same inspector then allegedly said to Mr.
Gyan Bahadur Balami “You were born in a rural area of Baglung district. So, you
can become a dacoit or robber but I was born in a city and I am an Inspector. I
don't need to work in the police force for my survival. After your release,
come to the open field and show me your power. I too will show my power how
much I can hurt you. Have you forgotten my advice I had given to you on the way
to the court.” All three were then brought back to their cells at Metropolitan
Police Range (MPR), Hanumandhoka, Kathmandu, where they remain
detained to date. On 19 December 2010, they were
remanded a seventh time for ten days. 
 
OMCT has also been informed that, on 21 December 2010, Mr. Gyan Bahadur Balami was
taken to Teaching Hospital to undertake further test for his damaged ear (medical
check-up scheduled before). Despite the doctor’s referral, Mr. Makar Bahadur
Gharti Magar (Iman) has still not been provided adequate treatment for his
damaged teeth and broken toe of his left leg. 
 
The International
Secretariat of OMCT reiterates its deep concern about the safety of Mr. Gyan Bahadur Balami, Ms. Lama and Mr.
Iman. Accordingly, OMCT calls again on the competent Nepalese authorities to guarantee their physical and
psychological integrity, at all times, in accordance, inter alia, with the
Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. 
 
OMCT also urges the Nepalese authorities to
immediately put in place protection measures for Mr.
Gyan Bahadur Balami, Ms. Lama and Mr. Iman, including their immediate transfer
to another detention centre, where they are not at risk of further torture and
ill-treatment, and suspend the policemen believed to be
responsible, pending an investigation. 
 
OMCT recalls that
Nepal is a State party to the Convention Against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which both prohibit
torture and ill-treatment. In line with their obligations under these treaties,
it is incumbent on the competent authorities to consider seriously any
allegations of torture and ill-treatment, and to undertake a prompt, effective,
thorough, independent and impartial investigation in this regard, in order to
identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and apply adequate
sanctions. Victims of torture and ill-treatment must be ensured the right to an
effective remedy for the human rights violations suffered as well as the right
to full redress, including compensation and rehabilitation.
 
Finally, OMCT
recalls Article 11 of the Convention against Torture which stipulates that “Each
State Party shall keep under systematic review interrogation rules,
instructions, methods and practices as well as arrangements for the custody and
treatment of persons subjected to any form of arrest, detention or imprisonment
in any territory under its jurisdiction, with a view to preventing any cases of
torture” and article 15 of the
said Convention, “Each State Party shall ensure that any statement which is
established to have been made as a result of torture shall not be invoked as
evidence in any proceedings (…)”.
 
Brief reminder of the situation
 
OMCT had earlier been informed about the
alleged torture and ill-treatment in police custody of Mr. Gyan Bahadur Balami
(Gyanu), his wife, Ms. Lama, and Mr. Iman, alias Makar Bahadur
Gharti Magar. They were allegedly tortured and ill-treated by seven policemen, including one
inspector (who was already involved in another case documented by OMCT[1]) and
a sub inspector, from the Metropolitan Police Crime Division (MPCD)
Hanumandhoka, in Kathamdu. 
 
According to the information received, Mr. Gyan
Bahadur Balami was the first to be arrested, on 31 October 2010, by about six
policemen from the MPCD, Kathamandu at Hetauda Bus Park in Makwanpur district
(about 150 km from Kathmandu), on suspicion of robbery and drug smuggling.
During his arrest, he was allegedly beaten with sticks, punched and kicked. He
was then handcuffed and beaten again for 20 minutes before the policemen
blindfolded him and took him in a jeep to a nearby jungle. There, he was
dragged out of the car. The policemen allegedly forced his head in-between the
roots of a fallen tree and put a pistol into his mouth. He was again beaten
randomly on his back, legs, hands and feet. The policemen also allegedly
drilled with a sharp wooden stick on his right sole and bent his fingers with
the purpose of obtaining information about alleged stolen items. Mr. Gyan
Bahadur Balami reportedly confessed to the crime. The policemen then allegedly
forced a pistol into his mouth and said “what is your last desire”. 
 
Mr. Gyan Bahadur Balami was later taken back to his house. The police
seized some money, boots, and jackets. The police also arrested his wife, Ms. Lama, who was taken
along to Makawanpur District Police Office (DPO). Once at the police station,
they were detained in separate detention cells. 
 
According to the same
information, Mr. Iman (alias Makar Bahadur Gharti Magar) was arrested, on 1 November 2010,
also on suspicion of drug smuggling and robbery. During his arrest, five to six
unidentified policemen allegedly beat him with sticks, boots and fists on
various parts of his body for about half an hour. He was then handcuffed and
taken to a nearby jungle. In the car, he saw Mr. Ghan Bahadur Balami whose face
and eyes were reportedly swollen. After five minutes drive, the police stopped
the jeep, took both of them out of the car and started beating them again while
asking questions about the alleged stolen goods and money. Both were then taken
to Butwal Area Police Office (APO), before being transferred to DPO Makawanpur.
On the way, the police reportedly stopped the car in Bardhaghat and beat them
again randomly for about ten minutes each. After approximately 25 minutes
drive, they arrived in front of a hotel in Daunne, Nawalparasi district where
they received food. Later, they were taken back to the jungle where three
unidentified policemen beat them again for about ten to fifteen minutes. At
around 10 pm,
they reached DPO Makawanpur where they were detained in a cell. 
 
On 2 November 2010, Mr. Gyan
Bahadur Balami and Mr. Iman were handcuffed and taken to a room where they saw Ms. Lama sitting
on the floor covered with dust all over her body. She was reportedly crying and
four policemen were standing by her side. Two of the policemen allegedly
stepped on her knees, another policeman stepped on her head with his boots and
a fourth one beat on the soles of her feet with bamboo sticks. They also poked with
a bamboo stick inside her paint and tried to take it off. Mr. Gyan Bahadur
Balami tried to intervene but he was allegedly forced to lie on the floor and
the policemen started beating him. The police then also started to beat Mr.
Iman with bamboo sticks on his hands, thighs and legs for about five minutes. 
 
On the same day, the police
took Mr. Gyan Bahadur Balami, Ms. Lama and Mr. Iman to Kathmandu.
On the way, one of the policemen reportedly showed them a dead boy without a
head on his mobile phone and allegedly threatened to kill them in a similar
manner. When they reached Balkhu in Kathmandu,
the policemen blindfolded and took them into a house that the police called
“safe house”. They were again severely beaten. They were later taken to
Metropolitan Police Range (MPR) Kathmandu
and then to Kathmandu District Court. They were remanded until 7th December 2010. 
 
According to the same information received, on 7 December 2010, Mr. Gyan Bahadur Balami was
taken to the Litigation Section of District Police Office (DPO) Kathmandu, where he was
forced to sign a paper in connection with another alleged house robbery. When
he refused to sign the paper, the inspector reportedly got angry, verbally
abused him and caught him by his hair before pushing his head against the wall
and punching him six times on his right cheek and once on his right knee with
his boots. The inspector then allegedly forced Mr. Gyan Bahadur Balami’s
signature and took his thumb stamp. He also reportedly threatened to shoot him
the following day. Mr. Gyan Bahadur Balami was then detained in the detention
cell of DPO Kathmandu. 
 
It is also reported that Mr. Gyan Bahadur
Balami had to pay for a medical check-up that has been scheduled for 21 December 2010. He reportedly suffers from
hearing loss due to the acts of torture and ill-treatment. 
 
According to the same information, Mr. Iman was
taken, on 5 December 2010, to Bir Hospital for a medical
check-up. However, he had reportedly to pay the doctor’s fee and the taxi fare.
In addition, he was not given the medicine that the doctor prescribed him and,
although the doctor has referred him for further examination to the orthopaedic
section, the police allegedly refused mentioning financial problems. 
 
Action
requested
 
Please write to
the authorities in Nepal urging them to:
 
i.                    
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Gyan Bahadur Balami, Ms. Lama and Mr.
Iman;
ii.                  
Order
their immediate transfer to another detention centre, where they are not at
risk of further torture and ill-treatment as well as threats;
iii.Grant
Mr. Gyan Bahadur Balami, Ms.
Lama and Mr. Iman
unconditional access to a lawyer of their choice and their families, as well as
guarantee that they are promptly examined by independent doctors and receive
adequate and free medical care, in accordance, inter alia, with the UN Standard
Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners;
iv.Order
their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges that are
consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist,
bring them promptly before an impartial, independent and competent tribunal and
guarantee their procedural rights at all times;
v.                  
Carry
out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into
the reports of torture and ill-treatment, the result of which must be made
public, in order to bring those responsible before a competent, independent and
impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as
provided by law;
vi.Guarantee
that no evidence obtained under torture and ill-treatment, or threats thereof,
be used in court proceedings against Mr. Gyan Bahadur Balami, Ms. Lama and Mr. Iman as stipulated in Article 15 of the UN
Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment;
vii.               
Ensure
that an effective remedy, including the right to full redress with compensation
and rehabilitation be granted to the victims concerned;
viii.             
Ensure
the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards, in
particular ensure that all acts of torture, and cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment and punishment are clearly defined in law as offences in accordance
with the provisions set out in Articles 1, 4 and 16 of the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and that
they be made punishable with appropriate penalties which take into account the
grave nature of the crimes as required.
 
Addresses
 
Ø     
Home Minister,Mr. Bhim Rawal, Ministry of Home
Affairs, Singha Darbar, Kathmandu, Nepal. Tel: +977 1
4211211 / 4211264, Fax: +977 1 42 11 232
Ø     
Inspector General
of Police, Ramesh Chand (Thakuri), Police Head Quarters, Naxal, Kathmandu, Nepal, PO. Box No.: 407,
Tel: +977 1 4 412 432, Fax: + 977 1 4
415 593. Email: info@nepalpolice.gov.np
Ø     
Attorney General,Mr. Bharat Bahadur Karki, Office of
Attorney General
Ramshahpath, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: +977
1 4262582, Email: attorney@mos.com.np
Ø     
Chief of Human
Rights Cell of police,Mr. Yadav Raj Khanal l, Human Rights Cell, Nepal
Police, Kathmandu, Nepal PO. Box. No.: 407, Fax: + 977 1 4415593 
E-mail:
hrcell@nepalpolice.gov.np
Ø     
Chairman of the
National Human Rights Commission, Mr. Kedar Nath Uppadhya, Pulchowck, Lalitpur, Nepal; Email: nhrc@nhrcnepal.organd also  complaints@nhrcnepal.org, Fax: +977 1 5547973
Ø      Permanent
Mission of Nepal, 81 rue
de la Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland,
Fax: +4122 7332722, E-mail: mission.nepal@ties.itu.int

 
Please also write to the embassies of Nepal in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 24 December 2010. 
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply. 


 
 
 



[1] See OMCT NPL 230210. 