Sudan:  Sudan: arrest and disappearance of Mr Hashim Babiker Tulob
January 10, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2001 / JanuarySudan: Sudan: arrest and disappearance of Mr Hashim Babiker TulobCase SDN 100101  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sudan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Mr Hashim Babiker Tulob who, according to the Sudanese Victims of Torture Group (SVTG), a member of the OMCT network, was arrested on Sunday 7 January 2001 in Khartoum.  According to the information received, the Security Forces searched his house before taking him to an unknown destination and his family were not informed of his whereabouts. Mr Tulob, a member of the Communist Sudanese Party, has previously been arrested four times and has spent a total of over two years in prison.  Given that Mr Hashim Babiker Tulob has reportedly been subjected to torture before, SVTG and OMCT are extremely concerned for his safety and fear that he may be tortured again.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:  i.	immediately locate the whereabouts of Mr Hashim Babiker Tulob and take all necessary measures to guarantee his physical and psychological integrity; ii.	order his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; i.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  His Excellency Lieutenant Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, People's Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 24911 787676 / 783223  Mr Ali Mohamed Osman Yassin, Minister of Justice and Attorney General, Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan  Mr Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan Fax: + 24911 779383  The Diplomatic Representatives of Sudan in your country.  Geneva, January 10, 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 