Palestine Autonomous Areas: Threats to Editor-in-chief of Hebron Times
February 21, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2000 / FebruaryPalestine Autonomous Areas: Threats to Editor-in-chief of Hebron TimesThreats to Editor-in-chief of Hebron Times  Case PAL 210200  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the Palestinian Autonomous Areas.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed the Palestinian Human Rights Monitoring Group (PHRMG), member of the OMCT network of threats and harassment against Khaled Amayreh, editor-in-chief of the Hebron Times in Palestinian Autonomous Areas.  According to the information received, the Palestinian journalist Khaled Amayreh has been summoned by both the Palestinian Authority General and the Israeli District Coordination Office (DCO) for questioning on the content of the Hebron Times, a newly launched weekly newspaper where Amayreh is Editor-in-Chief. He received threats of closure of the paper if he did not write favourable articles about President Arafat.  According to the information received, on February 11, Palestinian Authority (PA) General Intelligence officers summoned Amayreh to a “meeting” where he was questioned on an editorial he wrote on the Palestinian refugees’ right to return, arguing that no body has the right to give up on that right because it is “personal in nature, absolute and inalienable”.  According to the testimony of Amayreh, he was accused of doubting the PA’s commitment to the refugees’ cause and inciting the refugees against the leadership. The PA General Intelligence officers gave Amayreh the message that the PA Press Law of 1995 was not applicable in his case, as “the intelligence has its own laws”. One officer threatened to close the newspaper, and said: “I’ll burn it down if you continue to criticise the government”.  On February 15, Amayreh was summoned by an Israeli District Coordination Office official, and questioned on the same issue. The official argued that Amayreh’s editorials instigated the PA to take tougher stance on the refugees’ issue. Amayreh was again warned, as he was by the PA Intelligence, against incitement. The Israeli interrogator “reminded” him that Israel was still in control all over the area.  The day after, Amayreh was again summoned to the PA General Intelligence, in order to brief them on what the Israelis wanted. He was asked to publish material favourable to president Arafat in his newspaper. They were claiming that the paper in its current form was unacceptable, warning again that they would close the paper.  Remarks  The International Secretariat of OMCT reiterates PHRMG's call for the immediate implementation of the Palestinian Press Law of 1995, approved by President Arafat, in the cases of Palestinian journalists summoned by the Palestinian police, security or intelligence forces.  The 1995 Press Law prohibits security agencies from questioning, interrogating, detaining, interning or arresting a Palestinian journalist on matters pertaining to his journalistic profession.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Palestine urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Khalid Amayreh;  ii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these events and threats, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with international human rights standards, particularly Article 19 on Freedom of Expression of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.  Addresses  Yasser Arafat, President of the Palestinian Authority, Abu Khadra Building, Omar al-Mukhtar Street, Gaza, via Israel.  Fax : + 972 7 2822 365/6 ( if voice, say "fax, please").  Freih Abu Meddein, Palestinian Authority, Minister of Justice, Abu Khadra Building, Omar al-al-Mukhtar Street, Gaza, via Israel. Fax : + 972 7 2822 236   Khalid al-Qidrah, Attorney General, Palestinian Authority, Attorney General Building, Yarmouk, Gaza, via Israel.  Fax : + 972 7 2824 502.  Geneva, February 21, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 