Bahrain:  Ongoing obstacles to Ms. Nedal Al Salman's freedom of movement
November 29, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2017 / NovemberBahrain: Ongoing obstacles to Ms. Nedal Al Salman's freedom of movement

URGENT APPEAL - 
 THE OBSERVATORY

		 

New information

BHR 001 / 0417 / OBS 047.1

		Restrictions to freedom of movement /

		Harassment
Bahrain
		November 29, 2017

		 

		The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a 
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has 
received new information and requests your urgent intervention in the 
following situation in Bahrain.

		 

New information:

		 

		The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about ongoing 
obstacles to freedom of movement faced by Ms. Nedal Al 
Salman, Acting President and Head of Women and Children Rights at 
the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR).

		 

		According to the information received, on November 26, 2017 at 2 pm, Ms. 
Al Salman intended to board a flight to Toronto via Dubai at Manama 
International Airport. After she was successfully checked-in, she was 
stopped at the emigration desk, her passport was seized by a policeman, and 
she was told to wait.

		 

		After one hour, the policeman came back to Ms. Al Salman to inform her 
that she “[could] not travel as [she was] under travel 
ban”. When asking the reasons for such a ban, the policeman 
answered that he had no idea, and that she “should check with the 
Public Prosecution Office”.

		 

		This travel ban will prevent Ms. Nedal Al Salman from attending the 
European Union (EU)-NGO Forum on Human Rights on December 5 and 6, 2017 in 
Brussels, where she had been invited by the EU.

		 

		Ms. Nedal Al Salman has already been banned from travelling several times 
since August 29, 2016, and most recently in April and June 2017, ahead of 
sessions of the United Nations Human Rights Council (UN HRC) in Geneva (see 
background information).

		 

		On September 19, 2017, she was summoned and charged by the Public 
Prosecution for “illegal gatherings” under trumped-up charges 
stemming from the new Anti-Terrorism Law, and placed under a formal travel 
ban.

		 

		The Observatory strongly condemns the ongoing travel restrictions imposed 
on Ms. Al Salman, which is further evidence of constant reprisals conducted 
by the authorities against human rights defenders in Bahrain.

		 

		The Observatory recalls that more than 20 human rights defenders have been 
prevented to leave the country earlier this year, as a clear attempt to 
sanction their human rights activities (see background information).

		 

		The Observatory urges the authorities to immediately and unconditionally 
lift the travel ban against Ms. Al Salman and other human rights defenders 
in Bahrain, and to put an end to all acts of harassment, including at the 
judicial level, against them.

		 

Background information:

		 

		In April 2017, a new wave of summons and travel bans targeted at least 18 
human rights defenders, including members of the BCHR, the Bahrain Human 
Rights Observatory (BHRO), the Bahrain Human Rights Society (BHRS), the 
European-Bahraini Organisation for Human Rights (EBOHR) and Salam for 
Democracy and Human Rights (Salam), as well as four political 
activists.

		 

		Between April 20, 2017 and April 26, 2017, 22 human rights activists, 
including four BCHR members, Mr. Enas Oun, Mr.  
Ahmed Al Saffar, Mr. Hussain Radhi and Ms. Nedal 
Al Salman, as well as BHRO member Ms. Jalila Al Salman, 
along with BHRS member Ms.Zainab Al Khamees, EBOHR member 
Ms.Fatima Al Halwachi,Salam member Ms. Ebtisam Al 
Sayegh, human rights lawyer Mr. Mohamed Al Tajer, 
journalists Ms.Faisal Hayat and Mr. Ahmed 
Radhi, Ms. Zainad Mohamed, Ms. Riyhanna 
Mosawi, Mr. Talal Salawi, Mr. Monther Al 
Khoor, Mr. Sayed Hadi Al Moosawi, doctors 
Mr.Taha Al Derazi and Ms. Rulla Al Saffar[1] and 
four members of the political society Waad were all summoned to appear 
before the Public Prosecutor for interrogation.

		 

		The 22 individuals were all accused of supposedly participating in 
“illegal gatherings” in the city of Deraz on January 6 and 14, 
2017. Yet, none of the 22 participated in such alleged gatherings. Travel 
bans have been issued against the 22 individuals. The Observatory fears that 
the travel bans were preventively issued against the 22 individuals to 
prevent them from attending Bahrain’s Universal Periodic Review to be 
held in Geneva from May 1 to May 5, 2017 before the UN HRC.

		 

Actions requested:

		 

		Please write to the authorities in Bahrain, urging them to:

		 

		i. Guarantee in all circumstances the freedom of movement of Ms. Nedal Al 
Salman and all human rights defenders in Bahrain, by immediately and 
unconditionally lifting the travel bans against them, as they only aim at 
sanctioning their legitimate human rights activities;

		 

ii. Put an end to all forms of harassment against Ms. 
Nedal Al Salman and all human rights defenders in Bahrain, so that they are 
able to carry out their work without hindrance;

		 

		iii. Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on 
Human Rights Defenders, in particular with its Articles 1, 5(b), and 
12.2;

		 

		iv. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental 
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and 
international instruments ratified by Bahrain.


Addresses:

		 

		• Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 
587
		• Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, 
Fax : 00973 17 21 05 75; ofd@mofa.gov.bh


		• Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and Islamic 
Affairs, Fax: +973 175 31 284

		• Lt. Gen. Cheikh Rashed bin Abdulla AL KHALIFA, Minister of 
Interior, Email: info@interior.gov.bh
		• H.E. Mr. Yusuf Abdulkarim Bucheeri, Permanent Mission of 
Bahrain to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 758 96 
50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch
		• H.E. Ahmed Mohammed Yousif Aldoseri, Embassy of the Kingdom of 
Bahrain to the Kingdom of Belgium, Fax: 0032 (0) 26472274; E-mail: Brussels.mission@mofa.gov.bh


		• H.E. Muhammad Abdul Ghaffar, Ambassador of the Kingdom of Bahrain 
in Paris, France. Email:  
ambassade@ambahrein-france.com

		 

		Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Bahrain in your 
respective country.

		 

		***

		 

		Paris-Geneva, November 29, 2017

		 

		Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal 
in your reply.

		 

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the 
Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The objective of this 
programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression 
against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of 
ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism 
implemented by international civil society.

		 

		To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:

		·         E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org

		·         Tel and fax FIDH 
+ 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80

		·         Tel and fax OMCT 
+ 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29


			 



[1] 
              
Ms. Rulla Al Saffar is the former President of the Bahrain Nurses 
Society. 