Press Release: UN Day for Victims of Torture: No more time for indifference on torture!
June 25, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / 2015 / JunePress Release: UN Day for Victims of Torture: No more time for indifference on torture!Geneva, Tunis, Brussels, 25 June 2015
On the eve of the United Nations International Day in Support of Victims
of Torture the principal global civil society coalition against torture recalls
the plight of thousands of victims of torture across the world. It is time for
a new commitment to eradicate such practice once and for all.
‘Torture continues to be one of the darkest realities of our times. It
is a horrific and gruesome practice happening around the world, typically clouded
in secrecy and matched with impunity’, said the OMCT Secretary General on
the occasion of the UN Day for Victims of Torture. 
Torture breaks
the individuals it is inflicted upon leaving traces for the rest of their lives
and very often destroys the very fabric of societies. It corrupts our
institutions and legal systems if we leave it - as so often - unaddressed.
Ultimately, societies that accept torture will pay a high price in the longer
term.  Torture is used today for many
purposes and justified with fighting terrorism, organized crime, delinquency or
protecting democratic principles or stimulating economic growth. It can be
political or non-political and occurs in situations of repression but also in
democracies. It is troubling to see in our global work that torture hits
typically those population groups who are often forgotten such as the socially
vulnerable, marginalized and minority or indigenous populations as well as criminal
suspects. 
The OMCT provides through
its global victims fund support for legal, social and medical rehabilitation
across the globe and advocates for effective remedies and reparation for those
who were subjected to torture. In light of the many crisis around the world
there is a dramatic mismatch between the needs for support and the resources
available.
‘We have no shortage of international legal standards. But we need to do
much more to translate them into practice so that torture is effectively prevented
and not only prohibited on paper. Those who become victims to such treatments should
be able to access real remedies and get the assistance they need’, said
Gerald Staberock.In honour of the day for
victims of torture, the OMCT, the leading global civil society network against
torture, is calling for States to adopt effective legal and policy frameworks that
prevent torture and do provide effective and real life support to victims. In
the course of the next two days the international secretariat of OMCT with
members of its global SOS torture network will call for specific steps to
eradicate torture in events and campaigns organised in Mexico, Colombia, Ivory Coast, Togo, the Democratic Republic of Congo,
Tunisia, Pakistan and Bangladesh, Switzerland and the United States. These
are part of OMCT’s global campaign ‘nothing can justify torture’. This year’s
campaign is also associated with the Special Rapporteur on Torture’s campaign
for a ‘torture free world’.
The events in
partnership with OMCT member organizations illustrate the fundamental role that
civil society plays in defending the rights of those subject to torture. We
have seen in many parts of the world a wave of restrictions placed on civil society
documenting and reporting on torture. It is unconceivable that those who take
on the case of torture are subject to harassment, intimidation and in some
cases even detention. 
 ‘As we
commemorate the victims of torture we are also reminded of the need to support the
many members of the anti-torture movement who are suffering harassment and
repression because of their work. Representative of this is our call for the
immediate release of our General Assembly member Leyla Yunus and her husband,
arbitrarily detained in Azerbaijan’ declares the OMCT.
Sadly, we have
learned along the years that torture and impunity are not privy to the
developing world but also in democracies with a tradition of the rule of law.
The US torture policy with plain impunity is a case in point. In an
increasingly divisive world with an emergence of non-State actors that appear
to deny basic principles of humanity such persistent violations of the law and
double standards gravely undermine the global cause against torture.
This year’s UN
anti-torture day takes place in the midst of major migration crises across the
world when refugees are seeking safe havens and a life in dignity. In recent months
we have seen shocking actions when refugees are sent back to the high seas and
when States, including in Europe, are denying fundamental protections of
refugees. In an alarming number of cases, refugees are subjected to conditions
that amount to cruel and inhuman or degrading treatment or sent back to places
where they may risk being faced with torture. 
‘Respecting human dignity and ensuring that we are not sending back
people to torture must remain a non-negotiable baseline if we are not to be
complicit in torture’, recalls Gerald Staberock. 
For more information please contact:
Gerald Staberock,
OMCT Secretary General, +41 22 8094939, omct@omct.org or gs@omct.orgFor country-specific information please click below:- Bangladesh- Colombia- Democractic Republic of Congo- Ivory Coast- Mexico- Pakistan- Switzerland- Togo
- Tunisia- United StatesThe OMCT wishes to thank the European Commission
for its financial support to the OMCT activities on June 26 that are part of
its campaign of “nothing can justify torture under any circumstances”. 