Written contribution to OSCE's 2015 Human Dimension Implementation Meeting (HDIM)
September 23, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Azerbaijan / 2015 / SeptemberWritten contribution to OSCE's 2015 Human Dimension Implementation Meeting (HDIM)OSCE_HDIM_2015.09.23_Written_Contribution_English9 pages / 218 KBS​eptember 23,
2015Under Working session 4:
Fundamental freedoms I (continued), including: Freedom of peaceful assembly
and association National human rights
institutions and the role of civil society 
in the protection of human rightsThe International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of their joint
programme, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, wish
to draw the attention of the Organisation for the Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) on the ongoing threats and obstacles faced by human rights
defenders in OSCE Participating States.
 

In 2014 and 2015, human rights defenders in Eastern Europe and
Central Asia continued to operate in difficult and hostile environments. Repressive laws sanctioning legitimate human rights
work, judicial harassment and annihilation of human rights defenders continued
to be particularly acute in Azerbaijan, Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation, and
Uzbekistan.
 
The situation particularly deteriorated in Azerbaijan
and the Russian Federation, where the civil society has continued
to face acts of reprisals by the authorities while Kyrgyzstan undertook efforts
to introduce restrictive legislation drastically reducing human rights
defenders possibilities to support victims of violations. The situation in
Uzbekistan remains dramatic with human rights defenders community either
imprisoned, exiled or silenced. Human rights defenders have continued to be
subjected to lengthy pre-trial detention and arbitrary detention following
blatantly unfair trials, in particular in Azerbaijan and Uzbekistan,
while attacks and threats
against human rights defenders continued, most of the time with impunity,
especially in Kyrgyzstan and the Russian Federation. 
 
Arbitrary detention of human rights defenders
 
Throughout the region, human rights defenders have continued to be
subjected to lengthy arbitrary detention as a means to sanction their human
rights activities. 
 
In Azerbaijan, the
authorities have continued an unprecedented crackdown against human rights
defenders. The latter have been subjected to punitive detention on spurious
charges and are now serving harsh prison terms, following blatantly unfair
trials. On September 1, 2015, award-winning investigative journalist Ms. Khadija
Ismailova was sentenced to 7,5 years imprisonment on charges of
“embezzlement”, “illegal entrepreneurship”, “tax evasion”, and “abuse of
office” by the Baku Court of Grave Crimes. On August 13, 2015, Ms. Leyla Yunus,
Director of the Institute of Peace and
Democracy (IPD) and a member of OMCT General Assembly, and her husband Mr. Arif
Yunusov, Head of the Conflictology Department at IPD, were sentenced to 8.5 and 7 years in prison respectively. On
July 31, the Supreme Court of Baku upheld the
6.3-year prison sentence against Mr. Rasul Jafarov, engaged in the
defense of the rights of political prisoners and an active participant in
"Sing for Democracy" and "Art for Democracy", on criminal
charges of “tax evasion”, “illegal entrepreneurship” and “abuse of authority”.
On July 21, 2015, the Baku Appeal Court upheld the 7.5-year sentence against
Mr. Intigam Aliyev, a prominent human rights lawyer heading the Legal
Education Society. In addition, Mr. Anar Mammadli,
Chairperson of the Election Monitoring and Democracy Studies Centre (EMDSC),
sentenced to 5.5 years' imprisonment on May 26, 2014 for “tax evasion”,
“illegal entrepreneurship”, and “abuse of authority”, as well as Mr. Hilal Mammadov, a defender of the
rights of the Talysh ethnic minority sentenced in 2012 to 5 years in jail on
charges of “high treason”, also remain behind bars.
 
In Kyrgyzstan, Mr. Azimjan Askarov, Director
of the human rights organisation “Vozdukh” (Air) based in Jalal-Abad region, is
still serving a sentence to life imprisonment. On September 3, 2014, the Kyrgyz
Supreme Court rejected Mr. Azimjan Askarov’s appeal for a review of the case
against him. Mr. Askarov was unfairly accused of having allegedly ordered the
blockade in 2010 of the Bishkek-Osh Highway by some 500 armed protesters, and
having attacked police officers causing the death of one of them. On July 11,
2012, the Jalal-Abad Regional Prosecutor's Office had refused to allow the
re-opening of the investigation, after new facts were brought to its knowledge,
including new testimonies, unanimously asserting that Mr. Askarov was not
present on the bridge where the policeman was assassinated. Mr. Azimjan Askarov
is arbitrarily detained since June 15, 2010. 
 
In Uzbekistan, human rights defenders
continue to serve long prison sentences, most often in strict regime penal
colonies. Their health usually deteriorates due to poor detention conditions
and due to the regular abuses inflicted upon them. Due to be released on April
29, 2015 after serving nine years in prison, Mr. Azamjon Formonov
was convicted to additional five years in prison for "violating prison
rules". His wife was informed about the additional sentence on May 21,
2015. Mr. Azamjon Formonov is the former Chairman of the
Syrdarya regional branch of the Human Rights Society of Uzbekistan (HRSU).
Accused of attempted blackmail he was tried on June 15, 2006, in the
absence of a lawyer of his choice or even of a court-appointed lawyer and
sentenced to 9 years in prison for extortion. Other detained Uzbek human rights defenders include Messrs.
Ganikhon Mamatkhanov, Nasim Isakov, Yuldash Rasulov,
Zafar Rakhimov, Ganikhon Mamatkhanov, Gaybullo Jalilov, Solijon
Abdurakhmanov, Dilmurod Saidov, Azam Turgunov, and Abdurasul
Hudoynazarov.

Judicial harassment, attacks and threats against human rights
defenders
 
Human rights lawyers judicially harassed
 
In the OSCE region, several human rights lawyers remain judicially
harassed, threatened, attacked or intimidated as an attempt to sanction their
human rights activities.
 
In Azerbaijan,
on July 10, 2015, the Nizami District
Court upheld the request filed by the Presidium of the Azerbaijan Bar
Association (ABA) to disbarMr. Khalid Bagirov for alleged inappropriate
conduct in court. Mr. Khalid Bagirov is a prominent human rights lawyer who
represented human rights defenders Ms. Leyla Yunus, Mr. Arif Yunusov, and Mr. Rasul Jafarov. Mr. Bagirov was notified of the date of
the hearing on the eve of July 10. As a consequence, he did not have sufficient
time to prepare his defence and alert potential independent trial observers,
which constitutes a violation of his right to a fair trial. In December 2014, the ABA Presidium
suspended Mr. Bagirov's licence, hebery preventing him from further
representing the Yunus couple, Mr. Jafarov and opposition leaders Mr. Ilgar
Mammadov. Mr. Bagirov intended to defend human rights lawyer Intigam Aliyev.  Other human rights lawyers continue to face
constant obstacles to their activities.
 
In Kyrgyztan, on April
14, 2015, an investigator of the Department of Internal Affairs of Karakol City
issued a decision ordering the removal of human rights lawyer, Ms. Nurkyz Asanova, from the representation
of her client, Mr. Ishen Abdrashev. The decision came after Ms. Asanova filed a
lawsuit on behalf of her client against police officers, accusing them of acts
of torture and forced labour. 
 
Previously, on March 27, 2015, officers
from the Osh Office of the SCNS had searched the Osh offices of the Human
Rights Movement “Bir Duino”, and seized material including computers, material
related to criminal cases and USB drives containing working documents on human
rights issues. On the same day, SCNS officers also searched and seized material
at the place of residence of human rights lawyers Mr. Khusanbay Saliev
and Mr. Valerian Vakhitov, who work with FIDH member organisation “Bir
Duino”. Both lawyers have been working on the violations committed during the
Osh events in June 2010, and notably on the case of Ashirov Abdykerim, a lawyer
who had worked with “Bir Duino” on strategic cases and suddenly died on June
28, 2013. On June 24. 2015, the Supreme Court of Kyrgyzstan confirmed the
unlawfulness of both searches that took place on March 27.
 
Judicial harassment
and attacks against other human rights defenders and NGOs
 
In the Russian Federation, on
June 3, 2015, the Grozny
office of the Joint Mobile Group (JMG) was violently attacked and destroyed by
an organised mob. JMG, final nominee for the Martin Ennals Award 2013, is a
human rights defenders’ platform led by the Committee Against Torture (CAT),
member organisation of the OMCT and one of the few human rights organisations
providing legal aid to the victims of torture in Chechnya. During the attack
that lasted for a whole hour, the equipment
of the JMG, including a vehicle and a security camera, were savagely crushed,
incurring important material damage. The police reportedly took no action to
prevent the criminal acts despite multiple attempts to reach them by phone. The
attack took place the same day on which about two hundreds protesters gathered
in Grozny to attend a demonstration denouncing "the information war
against Russia and the Republic of Chechnya". This is not the first attack
against the JMG in Grozny. In December 2014, the JMG premises were set on fire,
causing significant damage while members of the JMG were chased by armed
assaulters.
 
Still in the Russian Federation,
the NGO “Planet of Hopes” (Planeta Nadejd) and its Director Ms.
Nadejda Kutepova,
Nuclear-Free Future award winner in 2011, faced continuous judicial and media
harassment. Since 2000, "Planet of Hopes" has been defending the
rights of victims of exposure to increased radiation and has been advocating
for the review of the legal regime put in place under the Law "On Closed
Administrative-Territorial Units" (CATU). On May 26, 2015, the Ozersk City
District Court (Chelyabinsk region) sentenced “Planet of Hopes” to pay a fine
up to 4,760 Euros for refusing voluntary registration as a "foreign
agent". Starting from the next day following the court ruling, a series of
defamatory reports on national television groundlessly accused Ms. Kutepova of
espionage and violated her right to privacy. This is not the first time that
"Planet of Hopes" is subject to harassment. On May 20, 2014, Ms.
Kutepova was summoned by a local police division, following instructions
received from the Ozersk Prosecutor’s Office. Her criminal record was verified
as well as the NGO's office lease. 
 
In
addition, on April 17, 2015 in Moldova, the de facto Transnistrian
Committee for State Security (Transnistrian KGB) issued a statement announcing that "on the territory of the Transnistrian Moldovan
Republic, some civil society organisations financed by the West are engaged in
activities hostile to the Transnistrian statehood". The statement further
targets the human rights organisation Promo-LEX calling its activities
subversive for de-facto Transnistrian 
security. It further reveals that a criminal case has been open, without
specifying against whom exactly. Since its establishment, Promo-LEX has
been involved in human rights activities in the Transnistrian region by
providing legal protection to human rights defenders, by assisting
Transnistrian inhabitants - Moldovan, Russian and Ukrainian citizens - in
obtaining justice and by building capacity of local Transnistarian NGOs to
promote and defend human rights. It is not the first time that a human
rights organisation working for the development of NGOs in the Transnistrian
region is described as subversive by the Transnistrian de facto
administration. Last year, the local de facto Parliament initiated a
draft law on "foreign agents" that specifically targeted civil
society organisations working on election monitoring and receiving funding from
abroad. The draft bill was adopted in the first plenary reading back in
November 2014 but has been put on hold.
 
The
situation is equally worrying in Hungary, where, since its
re-election on April 6, 2014, the Hungarian Government has led a smearing
campaign against Hungarian human rights NGOs in an attempt to gain control over
them or silence them by hindering their access to funding. On May 30, 2014, the
Government made public a list of 13 NGO grant recipients it considered to be
problematic for their so-called “left-leaning” political ties. The list
included prominent NGOs such as Hungarian Civil Liberties Union, Transparency
International and the investigative journal atlatszo.hu. These are all
organisations working on anti-corruption, human rights, gender equality and
freedom of speech. All of these organisations had been receiving grants from Norway,
for amounts ranging from 4,000 to 120,000€ each. From May to July 2014, many
Hungarian high-level government officials, including the Prime Minister
himself, further accused these NGOs of being “political activists […] paid by
foreign interests groups” and “attempting to enforce foreign interests […] in
Hungary”. These acts of harassment were followed by an extraordinary audit of
59 NGOs carried out by the Hungarian Government Control Office (KEHI), to which
the Norwegian Government later reacted by accusing the Hungary of attempting to
“limit freedom of expression”. On May 28, 2015, after having audited its NGO
programme in Hungary, the Norwegian Government officially declared that such
NGO programme “funded by Norway under the EEA and Norway Grants scheme is being
run effectively and in line with the legal framework”[1].
 
In
Turkey, a strong security offensive launched by the authorities
over the past two months under the pretext of countering terrorism following
the Turkish government’s resolve to mobilise against ISIS has led to grave
violations of the right to life, severe limitations to the right to freedom of
assembly and expression, crackdown on independent media and repressive actions
targeting human rights organisations and activists. Human rights organisations
and activists have been prevented from conducting their activities,
particularly when monitoring the situation and providing free legal and medical
aid. The risk of them facing administrative charges and judicial
investigations, possibly imprisonment, is high. Recently, the house of IHD
Şırnak Branch’s President Emirhan Uysal was raided by police forces and
lawyer Deniz Sürgüt was arrested and sent to prison. Both are charged
with accusations of joining a press conference on “autonomy” and being member
of an illegal organisation and carrying and commercialising guns, respectively.
 
Obstacles to human rights defenders’ freedoms of association,
peaceful assembly, expression and information
 
In 2014-2015, in a number of countries, the authorities continued
to resort to a variety of repressive or restrictive laws to impede the work of
human rights defenders with the aim to control civil society organisations. These practices breach Articles 5 and 13 of the United
Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, which guarantees freedom of
association and access to funding for human rights purposes.
 
In Azerbaijan, on December 17, 2013, the Parliament
adopted a set of amendments to the Law on NGOs, Grants and Taxation, aiming at
further restricting NGO work. These amendments provide that non-registered NGOs
cannot be considered recipients of grants anymore. Here we should note constant
ungrounded refusal by the Azerbaijani authorities to register NGOs, as was the
case with R. Jafarov Human Rights Club. Refusal to register NGOs that are critical of the
regime is a commonly used method of repression by Azeri authorities.
Unregistered organisations are barred from opening a bank account, work and
receive funding legally. Thus any funding is considered as personal income of
NGO leaders and any NGO activity is seen as illegal entrepreneurship. The
authorities use this very convenient repressive legal framework to prosecute
activists and human rights defenders for tax evasion and thus silences critical
voices, as they did against Rasul
Jafarov, Intigam Aliyev and many other detained human rights
defenders. Furthermore, registered NGOs are also obliged to register any
funding from abroad with the Ministry of Justice - a measure that allows the
regime to exercise full control of SCOs
 
On February 3, 2014, the President of Azerbaijan signed further
amendments to the NGO Law, allowing the authorities to temporarily suspend and
permanently ban national and foreign NGOs in Azerbaijan, and introducing new
offences punishable by fines. Criminal cases were opened against several NGOs
that had received foreign grants. New amendments were signed on November 19,
2014, further shrinking the capacity of NGOs to operate independently, by
posing additional obstacles to their ability to receive funding. 
 
In Kyrgyzstan, on June 4, 2015, the Kyrgyz parliament voted in favour of the proposed “foreign agents”
bill in first reading. The bill will need to pass two more readings and get the
president’s signature before it comes into law. The bill on “foreign agents” largely draws inspiration
from the restrictive Russian legislation on the same matter. The provisions of
the bill could be used to force any NGO that receives foreign funding to either
adopt the stigmatising label of “foreign agent” or otherwise put an end to its
activities. The provisions provide for tougher reporting requirements, the
violation of which would be punishable by a suspension up to six-month. This
text also provides for the criminalisation of NGO leaders “inciting citizens to
disobey their civic duties or commit other unlawful acts”, a vague wording that
could allow for the repression of the legitimate expression of dissent or
criticism. Offenders charged under this provision would risk up to three years
in prison.
 
On May 19, 2015, the Human Rights
Committee of the Kyrgyz Parliament was due to release its conclusions regarding
the amendments to the law. In a very concerning pattern, the Human Rights
Committee did not take any position on the bill even though it blatantly
contradicts the Constitution of the Kyrgyz Republic (Art. 4.2, Art. 52) and
undermines the right to freedom of association, including the right to access
funding laid out in Art. 22 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights to which the Republic of Kyrgyzstan is a party.
 
Moreover, a bill on “homosexual propaganda” was adopted by a
large majority of Parliament in first reading in October 2014. The bill aims to
impose administrative and criminal penalties on the
media and on any group or individual expressing “a positive attitude towards
“non traditional sexual relations” through the media or information and
telecommunication networks”. Offenders charged under this provision
would be subject to administrative and criminal penalties of up to one year of
imprisonment. A second reading vote took place on June 24, 2015. This bill was
condemned by civil society and human rights organisations as discriminatory and
infringing the freedoms of expression, assembly and other fundamental freedoms
protected by the Kyrgyz Constitution and international instruments ratified by
Kyrgyzstan.
 
In the Russian Federation,
in 2015, additional repressive laws were
adopted by legislative bodies to further restrict the work of civil society,
including human rights advocacy conducted in the country. On May 19, 2015, the
Russian Parliament adopted the law on “undesirable foreign and international
organisations”, to criminalise the work of foreign non-profit organisations
that “threaten the constitutional order, security of the State or its defence
capacity”. If labelled as "undesirable", the activities of such
organisations will now be banned on the territory of Russia, and banks and
other financial institutions will be prohibited from authorising any financial
operation originating from or destined to such an organisations. One of the
main goals of the law is to undermine the cooperation of Russian human rights
defenders and civil society activists with foreign NGOs that make their voices
heard inside and outside the country. Working for an "undesirable
organisation" will be sanctioned by a fine of 900 euros. The repeated
violation of the law would lead to the criminal responsibility of the NGO’s
directors and is punished by up to six years of deprivation of liberty. This
bill adds to an already very restrictive legislation for civil society
organisations further shrinking the space for freedom of association in the
country. Indeed, in 2012 the State Duma adopted a law that required NGOs to
register as “foreign agents” if they engage in “political activity” and receive
foreign funding. Because “foreign agent” can be interpreted only as “spy” or
“traitor”. Such label aims at discrediting NGOs and obstructing their working
environment. Since 2012, over 70 organisations were forced to shut their doors.
 
On July 8, 2015, the Upper Chamber of
the Russian Parliament (Federal Council) requested the Prosecutor General and
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to check the compliance of 12 foreign
non-profit organisations with the new law on “undesirable foreign
organisations”.The Federal Council's list includes several American
organisations such as the Open Society Foundation (OSF), the National Endowment
for Democracy (NED), Freedom House, the International Republican Institute
(IRI) and the National Democratic Institute (NDI), two NGOs uniting Ukrainian
diaspora around the world, and an informal group monitoring human rights in
Crimea. The inclusion of the latter unregistered group with no organisational
structure or staff demonstrates the clumsiness of the Russian decision makers
in their efforts to silence all critical voices. To date, NED is already
included into the said list. 
 
On the same day, the Regional Court of
Nijegorod (Nijegorodskaya oblast) upheld the previous city court decision to
include the Committee Against Torture (CAT), OMCT member organisation, into the
list of 'foreign agents'. 
 
 
 ***
 
Alongside these ongoing
violations, 2014 and 2015 also witnessed the positive development of Guidelines on Human Rights Defenders by the OSCE Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR), which was launched on June 10, 2014
under the Swiss Chairmanship of the OSCE in Bern, and of the Joint OSCE/ODIHR
and Venice Commission Guidelines on Freedom of Association. These documents
provide for a solid corpus of recommendations based on existing international
and regional law, standards and practices, and constitute a major normative
progress for the protection of human rights defenders within the OSCE area. 
 
The Observatory
calls upon all OSCE Participating States genuinely implement all the provisions
of these newly-adopted Guidelines, and believes that these should pave the way
for the development of a human rights defenders’ protection mechanism at the
OSCE level, which would be in charge of monitoring the implementation of these
commitments.
 
 

Recommendations


 
In view of the
situation of human rights defenders in the OSCE area, the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders urges OSCE Participating States to:
 
·       Guarantee in all circumstances the
physical and psychological integrity of human rights defenders in the OSCE
Participating States; 
 
·       Put an end to the continuous repression
and harassment of human rights defenders and their organisations;
 
·       Release immediately and unconditionally
all human rights defenders since their detention is arbitrary and only aims at
sanctioning their human rights activities;
 
·       Carry out immediate, thorough, impartial
and transparent investigations into the threats, attacks and acts of
intimidation mentioned above, in order to identify all those responsible and
sanction them according to the law;
 
·       Fully recognise the vital role of
defenders in the promotion and consolidation of democracy and the rule of law; 
 
·       Review their national legislation to
conform with international and regional human rights instruments, in particular
regarding freedoms of association and assembly; 
 
·       Comply with the provisions of the
OSCE/ODIHR Guidelines on Human Rights Defenders, the joint OSCE/ODIHR and
Venice Commission Guidelines on Freedom of Association and of the Declaration
on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations
General Assembly; 
 
***
 
With respect to the implementation of the
OSCE/ODIHR Guidelines on Human Rights Defenders, the Observatory also
calls upon:
 
·      
The OSCE Chairmanship to nominate an OSCE
Personal Representative on the situation of human rights defenders, who could
be in charge of:
 
                        -
monitoring the implementation of the Guidelines;
                        -
raise individual cases of violations with national governments
                        -
undertake country visits
                        -
publish periodic reports
 
·      
OSCE Participating States to develop protection
mechanisms both nationally and in third-countries, through their diplomatic
representations, in coordination, where required, with mechanisms that already
exist on the basis of the EU, Swiss and Norwegian Guidelines
 
·      
OSCE Participating States to make public pledges
on their commitment to implement the OSCE/ODIHR Guidelines
 
·      
OSCE Participating States to systematically
raise cases of violations of the Guidelines within the framework of the OSCE
weekly Permanent Council in Vienna, and ensure regular follow-up.
   


[1]                   
https://www.regjeringen.no/en/aktuelt/audit-hungary/id2413827/ 