Togo:  Press Release - Togo: OMCT presents alternative report on violence against women in Togo to 76th Session of UN Human Rights Committee
October 21, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Togo / 2002 / OctoberTogo: Press Release - Togo: OMCT presents alternative report on violence against women in Togo to 76th Session of UN Human Rights CommitteePRESS RELEASE   The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) expresses its concern regarding violence against women in Togo at the Seventy-Sixth Session of the UN Human Rights Committee   Geneva, 21 October 2002  The UN Human Rights Committee will today begin its examination of the implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in Togo. In its alternative country report entitled "Violence against Women in Togo", which has been submitted to the Committee, the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) expresses its grave concern at the widespread violence against women in the private and community spheres as well as at the hands of State officials.   Despite guarantees of equality in Togo’s Constitution and its ratification of international and regional human rights instruments which prohibit discrimination on the basis of sex, the subordination of women and girls continues to be part of both law and socio-cultural practices that are based upon male dominance. Women and girls are subjected to discrimination in the family, community and State spheres and this discrimination is perpetuated and condoned in legislation and by social customs. For example, the Personal and Family Code of Togo makes provision for polygamous marriage, specifies that girls may be married at 17 while the age of marriage for men is 20, entrenches men as heads of household and defines the husband as the administrator of common property of the spouses.  Domestic violence including battering and marital rape are serious problems in Togo, however, as a result of a combination of different social, economic and legal factors, many women are either unwilling or unable to report this violence. There is no specific legislation for the prevention and punishment of domestic violence and the police are reportedly ill-equipped to handle complaints of family violence. Domestic violence continues to be regarded as a “private affair” by most law enforcement personnel and members of the judiciary who generally urge women to take steps to reconcile with their abusers rather than lodging official complaints.  Women and girls in Togo are also subjected to a number of violent cultural practices in the family including; early and forced marriages, dowry-related violence, female genital mutilation and widowhood rituals. While government and NGO action have been reasonably effective in raising awareness of the harmful nature of female genital mutilation in most parts of the country, other violent cultural practices persist and few steps have been taken to eliminate these.   Conditions of detention for women in Togo do not meet minimum international standards and OMCT is deeply concerned by reports that women are subjected to torture and inhuman and degrading treatment whilst in police custody, prisons and other places of detention. Of particular concern is the fact that there is widespread impunity for the perpetrators of torture and inhuman and degrading treatment and that this impunity is reinforced by the failure of the government to amend the Criminal Code in order to create a criminal offence of torture and to provide appropriate sanctions for those found guilty. In addition, the fact that women in detention are routinely supervised by male wardens renders them particularly vulnerable to violence, including rape and sexual assault, whilst in detention.  Overall, OMCT’s report concludes that while Togo has a duty under international law to act with due diligence to prevent, investigate, prosecute and punish all forms of violence against women, irrespective of whether this violence is committed by public or private individuals, this obligation has not been adequately implemented at the national level.    For copies of the alternative report on violence against women in Togo or for further information on OMCT’s programme on Violence against Women please contact the Women's Desk on + 41 22 809 4939 or jb@omct.org. 