Iran:  Arbitrary arrest and detention of human rights lawyers Ghasem Sholeh-Saadi and Arash Kaykhosravi
August 23, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2018 / AugustIran: Arbitrary arrest and detention of human rights lawyers Ghasem Sholeh-Saadi and Arash Kaykhosravi

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
IRN 003 / 0818 / OBS 106
Arbitrary
arrest / Release on bail /
Arbitrary detention /
Judicial harassment
Iran
August 23, 2018

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Iran.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by the League for the Defence of Human Rights in
Iran (LDDHI) about the arbitrary arrest and detention of Messrs. Ghasem
Sholeh-Saadi and Arash Kaykhosravi, two human rights lawyers. 
 
According to
the information received, on August 18, 2018, Messrs. Ghasem Sholeh-Saadi and
Arash Kaykhosravi were arrested by security forces while they were taking part
in a gathering in front of the Iranian Parliament to protest against the
Guardian Council of the Constitution (GCC)’s control over the election process
in general in Iran and the vetting of candidates at all elections, and call for
free, fair and transparent elections[1]..
They were taken to Evin prison in Tehran. 

A third lawyer, Mr. Massood Javadieh, was also arrested in front of the
Parliament, before being released on bail on the same day. He has not been
notified of any charges yet.
 
On August
19, 2018, Messrs. Ghasem Sholeh-Saadi and Arash Kaykhosravi were transferred to
Greater Tehran prison, located in Fashafuyeh district outside Tehran, after
being charged with “assembly and collusion with intent to commit crimes against
national security” by Branch 5 of the Prosecutor’s Office, based inside Evin
prison.
 
Mr. Ghasem
Sholeh-Saadi is a former Member of Parliament, serving two terms between 1988
and 1996, and a Professor of Law in Tehran University, and has represented a
number of political activists in court. He has been disqualified from standing
in every parliamentary and presidential election since 1996. He has been
arrested and imprisoned several times and was arrested in April 2011, tried and
imprisoned by the Islamic Revolution Court for “insulting the Supreme Leader
Ayatollah Khamenei” and “spreading propaganda against the system”. He was
released at the end of his one-year prison sentence in April 2012. His health
had also deteriorated due to acts of torture suffered during a previous arrest
in 2002. 
 
Mr. Arash
Kaykhosravi has defended numerous human rights defenders and political
activists and is one of the lawyers representing the family of Mr. Daryoush
Forouhar, a former Minister of Labour who was killed in 1998 by agents of the
Ministry of Intelligence. 
 
The
Observatory condemns the arbitrary arrest of Messrs.
Ghasem Sholeh-Saadi, Arash Kaykhosravi and Massood Javadieh as well as the
ongoing detention of Messrs. Ghasem Sholeh-Saadi and Arash Kaykhosravi. The
Observatory calls upon the Iranian authorities to immediately and
unconditionally release Messrs. Ghasem Sholeh-Saadi and Arash Kaykhosravi and
put an end to the judicial harassment against them, which is only aimed at
punishing their legitimate and peaceful use of their right to freedom of
assembly and expression. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities of Iran asking them to:
 
i. Guarantee in
all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Messrs. Ghasem
Sholeh-Saadi, Arash Kaykhosravi and Massood Javadieh, as well
as of all human rights defenders in Iran;
 
ii. Immediately and unconditionally release Messrs. Ghasem
Sholeh-Saadi and Arash Kaykhosravi, as well as all human rights defenders
detained in Iran, as their detention is arbitrary as it is merely aimed at
punishing them for their human rights activities;
 
iii. Guarantee their right to due process and fair trial, as
protected under international law, including the unhindered access to their
lawyers and families;
 
iv. Put an end to all acts of harassment, including at the
judicial level, against Messrs Ghasem Sholeh-Saadi, Arash Kaykhosravi and Massood Javadieh,
as well as of all human rights defenders in Iran and ensure that they are able
to carry out their activities without hindrances;
 
v. Conform in all circumstances to the provisions of the
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the
United Nations General Assembly, in particular its Articles 1 and 12.2.;
 
vi. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights instruments
ratified by Iran.
 
Addresses:
• Leader
of the Islamic Republic, H.E. Ayatollah Sayed Ali Khamenei, Fax: + 98 21 441 2030,
Email: info_leader@leader.ir; Twitter: @khamenei_ir
• President
Hassan Rouhani, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: + 98 21 644 54811; Email:
media@rouhani.ir; Twitter: @HassanRouhani (English) and @Rouhani_ir (Persian).
• Head
of the Judiciary, H.E. Ayatollah Sadeq Larijani, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax:
+98 21 879 6671 / +98 21 3 311 6567, Email: info@dadiran.ir /
info@dadgostary-tehran.ir / info@bia-judiciary.ir
• Minister
of Foreign Affairs, Mohammad Javad Zarif, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax:
+98-21-66743149; matbuat@mfa.gov.ir
• Secretary
General, High Council for Human Rights, Mr. Mohammed Javad Larijani,
Islamic Republic of Iran. Email: info@humanrights-iran.ir
• H.E.
Mr. Javad Amin-Mansour, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22
7330203, Email: mission.iran@ties.itu.int
• H.E.
Mr. Peiman Seadat, Ambassador, Embassy of Iran in Brussels, Belgium, Fax:
+ 32 2 762 39 15. Email: secreteriat@iranembassy.be
 
Please also
write to the diplomatic representations of Iran in your respective countries.
 
***
 
Paris-Geneva, August 23, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme
is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the
European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international
civil society.  
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·    
E-mail:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·    
Tel
and fax FIDH +33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·    
Tel
and fax OMCT +41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / +41 22 809 49 29
 



[1]                
The GCC is responsible for supervising all national public elections,
interpreting the Constitution, weighing qualification of nominees for
presidency and those who seek a seat in Parliament and the Assembly of Experts
(AE), as well as ensuring the compatibility of the legislation passed by the
Parliament with the criteria of Islam and the constitution. The body exercises
discretionary power over all electoral processes and can disqualify any
candidates before and after elections without providing reasons. 