Nepal:  Nepal: Arbitrary arrest of Mr. Punya Lal Dahal
April 18, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2005 / AprilNepal: Nepal: Arbitrary arrest of Mr. Punya Lal DahalCase NPL 180405 Arbitrary arrest/Forced disappearance  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Nepal.    Brief Description of the Situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Informal Sector Service Center  (INSEC), a member of the OMCT network, that Mr. Punya Lal Dahal, 23, was arrested by Security Forces on 6th April 2005 in Subidahanagar, Tinkune in Nepal.  According to the information received, at about 3.30am, around ten security personnel arrested Mr. Punya Lal Dahal as he was sleeping in his room. Security personnel also searched his room and told his brother that they would release him after questioning.   OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Dahal whose whereabouts are still unknown.   Action Requested: Please write a letter to the authorities in Nepal urging them to:  i.	immediately locate the whereabouts of Mr. Punya lal Dahal and guarantee his physical and psychological integrity;  ii.	order the immediate release of Mr. Punya Lal Dahal in the absence of valid legal charges, and if such charges exist, to ensure that he is given a prompt and fair trial, in which his procedural rights are guaranteed at all times;  iii.	ensure the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.   Addresses: His Majesty King Gyanendra, Narayanhity Royal Palace, Durbar Marg, Kathmandu, Nepal  c/o Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Nepal to the United Nations, 81 rue de la Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 733 27 22; E-mail: mission.nepal@ties.itu.int  Mr. Nain Bahadur Khatri, Chairman of the National Human Rights Commission, Pulchowck, Lalitpur, Nepal; Email: nhrc@ntc.net.np   Please also write to the embassies of Nepal in your respective country.  Geneva, April 18th, 2005  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 