Honduras:  Justice for Berta Cáceres, protection for the defense of human rights in Latin America
March  2, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Honduras / 2018 / MarchHonduras: Justice for Berta Cáceres, protection for the defense of human rights in Latin America ​













The EU-LAT network, of which both OMCT and FIDH are member organisations, and CIDSE together made up of
more than 57 European and internataional organizations, echoing the requests of
COPINH and backed by representatives of the European
Parliament, demand justice, remembrance and the guarantee of non-repetition for
Berta Cáceres, as well as for the defense of human rights in Honduras and
throughout Latin America. 
 
On March 2, 2016, Berta
Cáceres, Lenca indigenous leader and coordinator of the Consejo Cívico de
Organizaciones Populares e Indígenas de Honduras (COPINH), was murdered at her
residence in La Esperanza, Honduras. According to the information available
thus far, even after two years, little progress has been made in the
investigation of the case. The public judicial hearings of the eight suspects
detained as material perpetrators have been postponed on numerous occasions.
The report
issued in November 2017 by the International Advisory Group of Experts (GAIPE) revealed a lack of due
diligence in the investigations, this includes the lack of processing other
possible intellectual authors of the murder.
 
Berta Cáceres dedicated her
life to defending the territorial and cultural rights of indigenous peoples,
women, Garífuna peoples and the peasantry. She was recognized nationally and
internationally as a defender of human rights and received the Goldman Prize in
2015 for her struggle in defending territory, natural assets and Mother Earth.
In the last years leading up to her murder, she was the victim of persecution, intimidation,
stigmatization and criminalization both by state and non-state actors, due to her
work in the context of opposition to hydroelectric and extractive exploitation
imposed on territories without free, prior and informed consent of the
indigenous peoples who live there. Since 2009, Berta was a beneficiary of
precautionary measures granted by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
(IACHR/CIDH). However, these measures did not protect her from the numerous
attacks against her and, ultimately, did not protect her from being
assassinated. 
 
The case of Berta reflects a
reality faced by defenders in Latin America, who act in favor of the
environment and the territory. Another emblematic case is found in Mexico,
where on January 15, 2017, Isidro Baldenegro, a well-known indigenous
environmental activist who fought against the illegal logging of the old forest
of the Sierra Madre Occidental in Tarahumara / Raramuri territory, was killed
in Chihuahua. Isidro Baldenegro won the Goldman environmental prize in 2005 and
was identified as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International.
 
Since the murder of Berta, the
number of murders of human rights defenders with protection measures provided by
the IACHR has increased alarmingly in the region. This situation, coupled with
little or no progress in clarifying cases of murdered activists, constitutes a
serious attack on the defenders and creates widespread impunity. 
 
Two years after the crime, the
EU-LAT Network and CIDSE urge the EU and its Member States to demand that the
State of Honduras adopt all necessary measures to ensure that the material and
intellectual actors of Berta Cáceres' murder are duly prosecuted, in line with
European commitment on the protection of defending human rights. 