Colombia:  Colombia: a positive initiative by the government
December  8, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Colombia / 2000 / DecemberColombia: Colombia: a positive initiative by the governmentPRESS RELEASE ON THE EXTENSION OF THE DEADLINE FOR THE AREA OF DISTENSION IN COLOMBIA   Geneva, 7th December 2000 Mr. Eric Sottas, Director of the WORLD ORGANISATION AGAINST TORTURE (OMCT), rejoices at the Colombian Republic Presidency’s decision to extend the deadline for the area of distension until 31st January next year in order to revive peace dialogues and to promote humanitarian agreements on which he has been working.  A few days before the President came to the above mentioned decision, the Director of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) sent an appeal both to the President and to the leaders of the FARC (Colombian Revolutionary Armed Forces). On the one hand urging the Colombian Government “to extend for at least six months the moratorium of armed activities in the areas of distension”, and on the other, urging the FARC-EP “to resume the peace discussions”.  In this very letter, the Director recalled “how positively the World Organisation Against Torture enhanced the talks held for several months between the Colombian Government and the insurgent armed movements, in spite of the divergences which brought them into conflict, in order to achieve peace.  This process has been made easier due to the Government’s decision to establish areas of distension and a moratorium on Armed Forces’ military operations, and thanks to the FARC-EP’s acceptance to suspend their armed activities in the said areas. The OMCT received the FARC-EP’s declaration, dated 12th November, in which they stated they would halt the mentioned dialogues, with great concern.  Besides the legitimate concern caused by such a decision concerning the future of peace negotiations, the OMCT feared the breakdown of the talks process might give rise to the spread of the armed conflict.  The Government had decided on 7th December 2000 to be the moratorium deadline to secure the non-intervention of Armed Forces in the areas of distension”.  The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) awaits a positive response from the FARC, unfreezing the dialogues and getting round again the negotiating table as soon as possible in order to let good intentions materialise in a political resolution of the conflict, taking into account the unconditional respect of Human Rights. 