Cambodia:  Appeals Court Denies Bail for ADHOC and NEC Staffers Ny Sokha, Nay Vanda, Yi Soksan, Lim Mony and Ny Chakrya
June 14, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2016 / JuneCambodia: Appeals Court Denies Bail for ADHOC and NEC Staffers Ny Sokha, Nay Vanda, Yi Soksan, Lim Mony and Ny Chakrya

New
information
KHM 001 /
0616/ OBS 047
Judicial
harassment /
Arbitrary
detention / Obstacles
to freedom
of peaceful assembly
Cambodia
June 14,
2016
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint partnership
of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
Cambodia.
 
New
information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the continuous
judicial harassment and arbitrary
detention of Messrs. Ny Sokha, Nay Vanda, Yi Soksan, and Ms. Lim
Mony, four staff
members of the Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association (ADHOC), as well as Mr. Ny
Chakrya, Deputy Secretary General of the National Election Committee (NEC)
and former Head of ADHOC’s human rights section. 

 

According to
the information received, on June 13, 2016, in an hearing presided by Judge Khun
Leang Meng, Cambodia’s Court of Appeals in Phnom Penh denied bail to Messrs. Ny Sokha, Nay Vanda,
Yi Soksan, Ny Chakrya and Ms. Lim Mony. 
 
Messrs. Ny Sokha, Nay Vanda,
Yi Soksan, Ny Chakrya and Ms. Lim Mony have been arbitrarily
detained since May 2, 2016, under bribery charges for providing legal and
material assistance to a client (see background information). If convicted, the five
human rights defenders face from five to ten years’ imprisonment.
 
Moreover, police interrupted the
peaceful protests of about 40 activists who had gathered outside the Court of
Appeals in order to call for the release of the five defenders. Ms. Sor Sorn, an activist from Borei
Keila community, was arrested outside the court and briefly detained at Phnom
Penh’s Daun Penh police station.
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the ongoing arbitrary detention of Messrs. Ny Sokha, Nay Vanda, Yi Soksan,
Ny Chakrya, and Ms. Lim Mony, which only
aims at sanctioning their legitimate human rights activities, and calls upon
the Cambodian to immediately and unconditionally
release them and drop all charges against them.
 
Background
information[1]:
 
On April 27
and 28, 2016, the five staff members of ADHOC - Mr. Ny Sokha (Head of the Human
Rights Section), Mr. Nay Vanda (Deputy Head of the Human Rights Section), Mr.
Yi Soksan (Senior Investigator of the Land and Natural Resources Section), Mr.
Try Chhuon (lawyer) and Ms. Lim Mony (Senior Investigator of the Women's Rights
Section) - as well as Mr. Ny Chakrya (Deputy Secretary General of the NEC
and former Head of ADHOC’s human rights section) were brought for questioning
by the Anti-Corruption Unit (ACU). UNOHCHR official Soen Sally, who was also summoned, did not appear before the ACU
due to his immunity as a UN staff member.
 
On
May 2, 2016, following five to six days of questioning firstly by
the ACU and then by the Prosecutor, Messrs. Ny
Sokha, Nay Vanda, Yi Soksan, and Ms. Lim Mony were charged with “bribery of
a witness” under Article 548 of the Criminal Code and detained in CC1 and
CC2 prisons in Phnom Penh. In addition, Messrs. Ny Chakrya and Soen Sally were charged as “accomplices to bribery
of a witness” (Criminal Code Articles 29 & 548). Mr. Ny Chakrya
was detained in Police Judiciare (PJ) prison.
 
The charges are related to a
complaint signed by Ms. Khom Chandaraty, also known as Ms. Srey
Mom. The complaint was lodged following her questioning in March 2016 by
anti-terrorism police and a prosecutor about an alleged affair with deputy
opposition leader Khem Sokha, after ADHOC responded to Srey Mom’s request for
legal and material assistance - a US$204 allowance to cover food and transport costs. This
legitimate support was aimed at covering the basic expenses of a client was
construed by the ACU as bribery and corruption.
 
On
May 9, 2016, two
human rights workers, four land rights activists and two international rights
workers were arrested in Phnom Penh as they attempted to make their way to a
demonstration organised to denounce the arbitrary detention of the five
defenders. All were released in the evening of the same day[2].
 
Similarly,
on May 16 and June 6, 2016 respectively, five and seven women activists were
briefly arrested on the occasion of “Black Monday” protests to call for the release of the
five defenders. They were all released later in the day, after they signed a
pledge to stay out of future Black Monday protests.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write
to the authorities of Cambodia asking them to:
 
i. Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Messrs. Ny Sokha, Nay Vanda, Yi Soksan,
Ny Chakrya, and Ms. Lim Mony as well as
of all human rights defenders in Cambodia;
 
ii. Immediately and unconditionally release of Messrs. Ny Sokha, Nay Vanda, Yi Soksan,
Ny Chakrya, and Ms. Lim Mony
as their detention is arbitrary since it only aims at sanctioning their human
rights activities;
 
iii. Put an end to all forms
of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Messrs. Ny Sokha, Nay Vanda,
Yi Soksan, Ny Chakrya, Soen Sally, and Ms. Lim Mony as well as
against all human rights defenders in the country so that
they are able to carry out their work without hindrance;
 
iv. Comply
with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in
particular with its Articles 1, 5(a), 12.1 and 12.2;
 
v. Guarantee
the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the
Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other international human rights
instruments signed or ratified by the Kingdom of Cambodia.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
Mr. Hun Sen, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, Kingdom
of Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 360666 / 855 23 880624 (c/o Council of Ministers),
Email: leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh / cppparty@gmail.com
·    
Mr. Sar Kheng, Minister of Interior, Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: + 855 23
212708
·    
Mr. Ang Vong Vathna, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, Kingdom
of Cambodia. Fax: + 855 23 364 119
·     Mr. Prak Sokhon, Minister of
Foreign Affairs, Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: + 855 23 216 144 / 855 23 216 141
Email: mfaic@mfa.gov.kh
·     Mr. Sok An, Deputy Prime Minister of the Kingdom of
Cambodia, Fax: +855 23 882 065, Email: leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh / info@pressocm.gov.kh 
·     Mr.Keo Remy, President of the Cambodian Human Rights
Committee, Office of the Prime Minister, Kingdom of Cambodia, Fax: +855 12 81
37 81 / +855 23 21 11 62 or +855 23 88 10 45 (c/o Council of Ministers)
·     Mr. Bun Hun, President of the Cambodian Bar
Association, Fax: +855 23 864 076, Email: info@bakc.org.kh
·    
Ambassador
Mr. Ney Samol, Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Cambodia to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: + 41 22 788
77 74, Email: camemb.gva@mfa.gov.kh
 
Please also
write to the diplomatic representations of Cambodia in your respective
countries.



[1] See Joint Public Statement, May 2, 2016.


[2] For more
information, see Observatory Press Release, May 9,
2016. 