Angola:  Conditional release and ongoing judicial harassment of 16 pro-democracy activists
July 13, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Angola / 2016 / JulyAngola: Conditional release and ongoing judicial harassment of 16 pro-democracy activists

New informationAGO 001 / 0615 / OBS 053.4Provisional release /Judicial harassment AngolaJuly 13, 2016
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Angola. 
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by
reliable sources about the conditional release and ongoing judicial harassment
of 16 pro-democracy activists, namely Messrs.
Henrique Luaty Beirão, Nuno Alvaro Dala, Nelson Dibango Mendes Dos Santos, Alfonso Joao Matias
(“M'banza Hamza”), Sedrick de
Carvalho, Fernando António Tómas, Hitler Chiconda (“Samussuku”), Italiano Arante
Kivuvu, Benedito Jeremias (“Dito Dali”), Albano Evaristo Bingobingo, José Gomes Hata, Inocêncio De Brito, Manuel Nito
Alves and Ms. Rosa
Kusso Conde, Ms. Laurinda Manuel Gouveia, journalist Mr. Domingos da Cruz
as well as Mr. Osvaldo Correia Caholo, a reserve military officer acquainted to
one of the 16.
 
According to the information received, on June
29, 2016, the Supreme Court of Angola ordered the conditional release of the 16
activists and Mr. Osvaldo Correia Caholo following the Supreme Court’s decision
on the habeas corpus. All were provisionally released the same day except Mr.
Nito Alves, who was also serving a six-month jail term for contempt of Court. The
latter was released on July 5, 2016 by the Constitutional Court. The Court
considered that his trial was violating some of his constitutional rights.  They are not allowed to leave the country and have to appear before the Luanda Provincial Court every month,
 
The
Observatory welcomes the release of the 16 activists and Mr. Osvaldo Correia Caholo but
deplores the continuing judicial harassment against them, which seems to merely aim at sanctioning their
human rights activities.
 
The Observatory calls
upon the Angola authorities to put
an end to any kind of harassment, including at the judicial level, against them
as well as against all human rights defenders in Angola. 
 
Until the charges are dropped against
them, the Observatory further urges the Angolan authorities to ensure that all
judicial proceeding against them are carried out in full compliance with their
right to a fair trial, as protected under international law. 
 
Background information:
 
On June 20, 2015, 13 pro-democracy
activists were arrested by the police while participating in a book club
meeting to discuss human rights violations and governance concerns in Angola.
The police carried out searches without warrants and seized IT hardware from
homes of some of the people they suspected of taking part in the meeting.
Others were arrested a few days later. 
 
Most of the young people arrested and detained were
pro-democracy activists (except lieutenant Osvaldo Caholo and Zenóbio Lázaro) who have been organising
peaceful protests against the 36-year-regime of Angolan President Eduardo Dos
Santos since 2011. These protests were often shut down after only five minutes
and protesters were sometimes arrested and tortured.
On November 16, 2015, the trial finally opened against 16 pro-democracy activists and Osvaldo Caholo before the Luanda Provincial Tribunal[1]. Several of the accused were subjected to acts of ill-treatment and violence during their arrest and detention. Some of them out of despair or to alert the general public on their ordeal, attempted suicide or participated to hunger strikes.

 
On March 28, 2016, the Luanda Provincial
Tribunal sentenced the 16 pro-democracy activists and Osvaldo Caholo to jail terms ranging from two years and three months to
eight years and six months for the alleged crimes of “preparatory acts of
rebellion” (Article 21 of the Criminal Code) and “association of criminals”
(Article 263), among other charges.
 
On May 31, 2016, the WGAD released an opinion
regarding the detention of the young rights activists[2]. They concluded that their
detention was arbitrary as “these individuals were arrested and detained because
of the exercise of their freedom of assembly, opinion and expression” and asked
for their immediate release. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Angola,
urging them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of the 16 pro-democracy activists and Osvaldo Caholo;
 
ii. Immediately and unconditionally drop all
charges against the 16 pro-democracy activists and Osvaldo Caholo, release all
human rights defenders detained in Angola, as these restrictive measures seem
to merely sanction their human rights activities;
 
iii. Put an end to all acts of harassment,
including at the judicial level, against the 16 activists and all those
associated with the above-mentioned case and all human rights defenders in
Angola;
 
iv. Comply with all the provisions of the
United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular with its
Articles 1, 6(c) and 12.2;
 
v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human
rights standards and international instruments ratified by Angola.
 
Addresses:

Mr. Rui Jorge Carneiro
Mangueira, Minister of Justice and Human Rights of Angola, Fax: +244 222 370 150 /
222 370 366 /+244 222 330 327, Email: rui.mangueira@minjus.gov.aoH.E. Mr. Apolinário Jorge
Correia, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Angola to the United Nations Office
in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 732 30 72, E-mail: contact@mission-angola.chH.E. Elizabeth Simbrão, Ambassador,
Embassy of Angola in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 23440894, E-mail: angola.embassy.brussels@skynet.be Please also write to the diplomatic
mission or embassy of Angola in your respective country.


[1] For more information on the trial see
Observatory dossier describing and analysing the proceedings: “Why the “Angola 15”
trial is a parody of justice?”


[2] See
UN
WGAD Opinion No. 21/2016 (Angola), UN Document A/HRC/WGAD/2016, May 31,
2016. 