Argentina:  Argentina: harassment and death threats against the family of Roberto Agustín Lúquez
January 11, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Argentina / 2001 / JanuaryArgentina: Argentina: harassment and death threats against the family of Roberto Agustín LúquezCase ARG 011101 The International Secretariat of the OMCT requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Argentina.  Brief description of the situation: The International Secretariat of the OMCT has been informed that Mrs. Olga Lúquez and several members of her family have been subject to harassment and have received death threats in the province of Mendoza. According to the information received, Mrs. Olga Lúquez, has led a campaign calling for justice in the case of the death of her son, Roberto Agustín Lúquez, who died after being shot by police of the Tropero Sosa police station on September 17 1999.  According to her declarations, she is now being subjected to threats and harassment. These threats have recently become more serious and she alleges that a policeman of Tropero Sosa station has threatened her personally by telephone. According to reports, on October 11, 2001, Mrs. Olga Lúquez saw a police car waiting inside the schoolyard as she was taking her daughter to school. As she approached the school, a number of armed agents got out of the vehicle, and then left when she and her daughter entered the school building. School authorities told Mrs. Olga Lúquez that none of them had called the police.  In a previous incident on September 17, 2001, Mrs. Olga Lúquez appeared on a regional TV program to commemorate her son's death anniversary. That day, a policeman from Tropero Sosa approached her in a bus and gun to intimidated her with a gun. In addition,  family friends who appeared beside her in the television program were verbally abused during police interrogations and have received death threats and warnings to drop the Roberto Agustin Luqeuz case.  Background information Roberto Agustín Lúquez, 17 years old, was walking in the street with his friend, when three persons, apparently policemen, stepped out of a police patrol car and approached them, as if they were about to make an arrest. Both young men ran away because they didn't have their identification documents with them.  Roberto Agustín hid inside a neighbouring house..  The police agents followed him inside and fired at him with rubber pellets. Three pellets perforated one of young Roberto Agustín's lungs.  He was taken to hospital but died 16 days later as a result of the above-mentioned injuries. One of the three policemen has been accused of accidental homicide, while the other two policemen have not been charged; however, the investigation has suffered delays and obstacles, and Mrs Olga Lúquez is campaigning for the case to go ahead, and as a result her own physical and psychological integrity is now under threat. The International Secretariat of the OMCT is seriously concerned about Mrs. Olga Lúquez’s security, for her physical and psychological integrity and for that of other members of her family.   Requested Action:  Please write to the Argentinian Authorities urging them to:  i. take all measures necessary to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned persons and to bring an end to their harassment; ii. order a thorough and impartial investigation into the above-mentioned events, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to justice and apply the civil, penal or administrative sanctions stipulated by law; iii. guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental liberties in all the country in accordance with national law and international human rights norms.  Addresses   Please also write to the embassies of Argentina in your respective country.  Geneva, November 1, 2001 