Sudan:  'Sudan: Continuing harassement of Mr. Faisal Al Bagir Mohamed
November  2, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2001 / NovemberSudan: 'Sudan: Continuing harassement of Mr. Faisal Al Bagir MohamedURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY   New information SDN 004/0106/OBS 054.2 Continuing harassment and material confiscation Sudan  November 2, 2001   The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders,  a joint programme of FIDH and OMCT, has received new  information regarding the situation in Sudan.  New Information :  The Observatory has been informed by the Sudanese Victims of  Torture Group (SVTG) of the continuing harassment of Faisal  Albagir Mohamed in Sudan.  According to the information received, Mr. Faisal Albagir  Mohamed, member of the SVTG inside Sudan and of the  Khartoum Centre for Human Rights, was ordered by the security  forces to report for interrogation on Monday 29th October 2001.  He has been there interrogated during two hours about his  activities with the SVTG and the Khartoum Centre. He has also  been questioned about the petition and complaints he wrote to the  Minister of Justice, in which he asked for the restitution of his  personal belongings, confiscated in June 2001. These belongings  include his motorcycle, a PC, a printer, a fax, several books and  personal documents.   On October 16th 2001, Faisal had already been interrogated on the  same issues by the security forces.  The Observatory expresses its concerns about the ongoing  harassment of Mr. Faisal Albagir Mohamed and the confiscation  of his belongings, both aimed at hindering his work as a human  rights activist.  The Observatory would also like to underline that those acts of  harassment are taking place just after that the Sudanese  government instructed on 18th October the human rights and  cultural centres whose activities had been suspended or placed  under heavy surveillance at the beginning of October – among  whom the Khartoum Centre for Human Rights – to resume their  activities. The Observatory took good note of this information but  was still concerned by the fact that the government also stated  that all the centres would remain under continued surveillance.  The present information seems to confirm this allegation.  Brief reminder of the situation  Faisal Albagir Mohamed, had been arrested on June 13th 2001,  released on the same day and ordered to report again on June 14th  . He was then held incommunicado in solitary confinement in  Kober prison, Khartoum, during seven days and then detained in  another section with co-detainees five other days. He was  released on June 26th. He had reportedly not been tortured or ill- treated during his detention, but the authorities had confiscated  from him the above described belongings. He had already  announced that he would ask for their restitution. Mr. Faisal  Albagir had also reportedly been interrogated about other  members of SVTG during his detention.  Faisal Albagir is a well known journalist and active member of the  SVTG network inside Sudan.  He has strong contacts with  international human rights organisations and the human rights  community inside Sudan. Last year he was accredited by the  World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), to attend the 52nd  session of the UN Sub Commission on the Promotion and  Protection of Human Rights.     Action requested :  Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:  i.guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of  Faisal Albagir under all circumstances; ii.put an end to all forms of harassment of human rights  defenders and their organisations, and ensure that  they are allowed to carry out their work without  obstacles;  iii.ensure the application of the provisions of the  Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by  the General Assembly of the UN on December 9th  1998, especially with respect to the protection of the  right of all persons, "...individually or in association  with others, to promote and to strive for the protection  and realisation of human and fundamental freedoms  at the national and international levels"  (Art.1.) as  well as the duty of the State to ensure the protection  by the competent authorities of everyone, individually  and in association with others, against any violence,  threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure, adverse  discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action  as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of  the rights referred to in the present Declaration"  (Art.12.2);   iv.ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights  and fundamental freedoms in accordance with  international human rights standards.   Addresses :  ·	His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al- Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, People's Palace, PO Box 281,  Khartoum, Sudan, Telex: 22385 PEPLC SD or 22411 KAID SD- Fax: +249 11 771  7 24 ·	Mr Ali Osman Yasin, Minister of Justice and Attorney  General, Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan. Telex:22459 KHRJA SD or  22461 KHRJA SD (via Ministry of Foreign Affairs) - Fax: +249 11 7740 63 ·	Mr Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs,  Ministry of Foreign Affairs, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan, Telex: 22459  KHRJA SD or 22461 KHRJASD - Fax: 249 11 7740 63  Paris - Geneva,  November 2, 2001   Kindly inform the Observatory of any action undertaken quoting  the code of this appeal in your reply.  The Observatory, a joint programme of FIDH and OMCT, is  committed to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and  strives to offer them support in their time of need.  The Observatory was the winner of the 1998 Human Rights Prize  of the French Republic.  To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line : E-mail: observatoire@iprolink.ch   Tel and Fax FIDH:  +33 1 43 55 20 11 / 43 55 18 80 Tel and Fax OMCT :  +41 22 809 49 39 / 809 49 29 