Egypt:  Death threats against CIHRS Director Bahey el-Din Hassan: European States and US must take measures to protect Egyptian human rights defenders, both home and abroad
April 18, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2018 / AprilEgypt: Death threats against CIHRS Director Bahey el-Din Hassan: European States and US must take measures to protect Egyptian human rights defenders, both home and abroad





 
The undersigned civil society organisations express
their outrage at the latest death threats targeting the Director of Cairo
Institute for Human Rights Studies (CIHRS), Bahey el-Din Hassan, as
a result of his human rights work on Egypt in Europe and the US. On 21 March
2018, in reaction to a memo sent by seven Egyptian independent human rights
groups, including CIHRS, to the UN Secretary-General regarding the presidential
elections in Egypt, a TV show host called on the Egyptian authorities to
"deal with him [Bahey el-Din Hassan] the same way the Russian spy was
dealt with,"[1] 
in reference to the nerve agent attack on Serjei Skripal in the United
Kingdom. 
 
Given the gravity of these threats against Bahey
el-Din Hassan, the undersigned organisations call on the European
States and the United States to (1) take all necessary measures to protect
Egyptian human rights defenders (HRDs), both home and abroad, and (2) to urge
the Egyptian authorities to carry out immediate, thorough and impartial
investigations on these threats. HRDs should be able to engage with
regional and international human rights systems without fear for their lives.
Support for HRDs is a stated priority of EU, Swiss, Norwegian and US foreign
policies, and lies at the heart of the 1998 UN Declaration on HRDs.
 
CIHRS is an indispensable and internationally
recognised organisation, which has been a champion of human rights across the
Middle East and North Africa for over 20 years.
 
These events not only constitute the latest example of
the harassment that Mr Hassan has faced in the last years, which forced him
into exile in 2014 following the election of President el-Sisi, but also
represent an extremely worrying pattern of reprisals against HRDs in Egypt and
many other parts of the world.
 
While pro-democracy activists in Egypt are being
jailed for expressing their views on social media, these repeated and serious
incitements on television calling to inflict physical harm against Bahey el-Din
Hassan as well as other HRDs have not been adequately addressed by the Egyptian
authorities. Amidst an unprecedented crackdown on human rights and civil
society, together with a soon-to-be implemented draconian NGO law, the Egyptian
authorities appear determined to silence HRDs by any means, including
instructing security services and State-sponsored media to intimidate them in
Egypt and abroad. 
 
Egyptian  NGOs already witnessed this kind of harassment during a human rights
workshop in Rome in May 2017, when two persons pretending to be Egyptian
journalists intimidated and took pictures of the Egyptian participants.
Subsequently, a smear campaign was launched in Egypt where Moustafa Bakry, a
political figure closely associated to President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi and a
member of the pro-Sisi parliamentary bloc, stated on his TV show that the
Egyptian security agencies should "kidnap" Egyptian human rights
defenders, including Bahey el-Din Hassan, from Europe and bring them back to
Egypt "in coffins",[2]  reminding them that
this had been done in the past.
 
About
Bahey el-Din Hassan
 
Bahey el-Din Hassan is a journalist, he has published
articles in The New York Times and The Washington Post. He is a leading
initiator of the human rights movement in Egypt and the Arab region, director
and co-founder of CIHRS, and a member of the boards and advisory committees of
several international human rights organisations, including the Euro
Mediterranean Foundation of Support to Human Rights Defenders (EMHRF), Human
Rights Watch (HRW) Middle East and North Africa Division, and the International
Center for Transitional Justice (ICTJ). Hassan is also one of the founding
members of EMHRF and EuroMed Rights.
 
Signatories:
1.    Americans for Democracy and Human Rights in
Bahrain (ADHRB)
2.    Asian Forum For Human Rights and Development
(FORUM-ASIA) 
3.    Asian Legal Resource Centre (ALRC)
4.    Association for Human Rights in Ethiopia
(AHRE)
5.    Caucasus Civil Initiatives Center (CCIC)
6.    Centro de Estudios Legales y Sociales (CELS)
- Argentina
7.    CIVICUS - World Alliance for Citizen
Participation 
8.    Conectas
9.    DefendDefenders (East and Horn of Africa
Human Rights Defenders Project)
10.  EuroMed Rights
11.  FIDH, within the framework of the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
12.  Front Line Defenders
13.  Human Rights First 
14.  Human Rights Watch
15.  International Service for Human Rights (ISHR)
16.  JOINT Liga de ONGs em Mozambique 
17.  Karapatan (Philippines)
18.  Odhikar (Bangladesh)
19.  Project on Middle East Democracy (POMED)
20.  Reporters Without Borders
21.  Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights
22.  The Working Group on Egypt (USA) 
23.  World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT),
within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders
 
[1] Link to the video (in
Arabic) https://youtu.be/gZE8zCePfqw


[2] Link to the TV show (in Arabic) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eirJclgosPs (min 34) 