France:  Arrest and detention of Alkarama executive director, Dr Mourad Dhina
January 24, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / France / 2012 / JanuaryFrance: Arrest and detention of Alkarama executive director, Dr Mourad DhinaLetter_Dr Mourad Dhina2 pages / 169 KB
24 January 2012
M. François Fillon
Prime Minister
Hôtel de Matignon
57, rue de Varenne
75700 Paris
FRANCE
Re:      Arrest and detention of Alkarama executive director,
Dr Mourad Dhina 

Mr Prime Minister,
We, the undersigned international and national human
rights organizations, call on you not to extradite Dr Mourad Dhina, executive
director of Alkarama – a Swiss foundation working on human rights in the Arab
world. French police arrested Dr Dhina on Monday 16 January 2012, at the request of the Algerian authorities.
In addition to being Alkarama’s executive
director, Dr Dhina is also a founding member of Rachad, a peaceful political association that is legally registered in France and
that seeks democratic change in Algeria.
Dr Dhina had been attending a meeting of Rachad
in Paris when police arrested him at Paris-Orly airport as he was about to fly
back to Geneva, where he resides. Since then, French authorities have stated that they
are detaining Dr Dhina at the request of the Algerian authorities, who are
seeking his extradition to Algeria
for prosecution on charges that he belonged to an armed terrorist group in Switzerland
in the 1990s.
On Tuesday 17 January, the President of the
Paris Court of Appeal confirmed Dr Dhina’s detention in view of his potential
extradition to Algeria, and that Algerian authorities would have 30 days to present the case
for his extradition.
Dr Dhina has played a key role in exposing
human rights violations in the Arab world through his work at Alkarama. In
addition, his political activities have been carried out in lawful exercise of
his freedom of expression and association, as guaranteed under international
law. Dr Dhina had travelled freely to France
on numerous past occasions. We therefore fear that the request by the Algerian
authorities may be motivated by a desire to muzzle him because of his political
activities with Rachad and his activities as a human rights defender with
Alkarama. 
We further fear that Dr Dhina would be at risk
of torture and ill-treatment if he were sent back to Algeria,
given the documented use of torture by the Algerian authorities – most recently
referred to by the Committee against Torture during its review of Algeria
in 2008. This would be contrary to France’s
obligations under articles 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights and the
United Nations Convention against Torture. 
We also are concerned that Algeria’s
record of convicting suspects in manifestly unfair trials in cases involving
allegations of terrorism would put Dr Dhina at risk of a conviction and a
prison term on the basis of a trial that falls far short of international norms
for a fair trial violating the prohibition of non-refoulement. 
Given the key role France has played in the
establishment of an international system for the promotion and protection of
human rights, and the emphasis it places on the respect of human rights
domestically, we hope that you will be able to assist us in protecting Dr
Dhina’s rights by ensuring that he is not extradited. Furthermore, if there is
no credible evidence that he has committed any crimes that are recognized as
such under international standards, we urge French authorities to release him
immediately. France must uphold its international obligations with respect to human rights
and avoid possible complicity in efforts by Algerian authorities to stifle
opposition and human rights activities by Algerians in exile.



Yours sincerely,


ACAT-France
Algeria-Watch
Alkarama
Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies
(CIHRS)
Centre Libanais pour les Droits de l’Homme (CLDH)
Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network
(EUROMED)
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)
Front Line Defenders
International Commission of Jurists (ICJ)
Ligue des droits de l’Homme
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) 