Cambodia:  Freedoms of expression, association and assembly: A shrinking space
September  2, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Reports and Publications / Cambodia / 2010 / SeptemberCambodia: Freedoms of expression, association and assembly: A shrinking spaceCambodia_report48 pages / 1.64 MB

PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

 
Human rights defenders face ‘shrinking space’ in Cambodia
 
 
Paris - Geneva,
September 2, 2010. Cambodians have faced increasingly severe restrictions on
their freedom of expression since 2008, according to a new report by the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders. 
 
The report, “CAMBODIA:
Freedoms of expression, association and assembly: A shrinking space”, is the result of an
international fact-finding mission carried out in Phnom Penh, Siem Reap and Ratanakiri (Cambodia), from February
14 to 24, 2010. The Observatory is a joint programme of the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT)[1]. 
 
The Observatory found that trade union leaders, land
rights activists and journalists have faced among the worst human rights
violations, facing new legal restrictions and fierce retaliation for
documenting and denouncing abuses. The trade union movement, for example,
remains shaken by the assassination of three leaders of the Free Trade Union of
Workers of the Kingdom of Cambodia (FTUWKC) in 2004 and 2007 - Messrs. Chea Vichea (2004), Ros Sovannareth (2004)
and Hy Vuthy (2007).
Their real assassins have yet to be brought to justice, and police
investigations are at an apparent standstill. 
 
Meanwhile, as of
December 8, 2009, 52 land rights activists were detained in Cambodia’s prisons
– most on trumped-up charges designed to remove them from their role as
community leaders. Countless others have suffered forced evictions and
harassment.
 
“Time and again we see the same pattern – those who
dare to speak out against injustice are arrested, imprisoned and intimidated”,
said Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH President. “The message to human rights defenders
is clear: Be quiet, or the Government will forcibly silence you.”
 
The Government has also stepped up activity on the
legislative front, enacting and proposing a trio of new laws which dramatically
reduce space for freedoms of expression, assembly and association. 
 
The Law on Peaceful Demonstrations, which places
excessive restrictions on the freedom of assembly, was promulgated on December
5, 2009 and finalised without consultation of the civil society. The vague
terms of the law give to the authorities sweeping discretion to deny Cambodians
permission to peacefully assemble and protest. The Observatory believes that
the law is inconsistent with Cambodia’s Constitution and the country’s
international human rights obligations. 
 
“The new law is worrisome because authorities often
refuse to authorise demonstrations or delay granting authorisation until the
eleventh hour, even though the letter of the law only contains notification
requirements”, said Eric Sottas, OMCT Secretary-General. “It is yet another
tool for the Government to silence its critics” he added.
 
The Government is also in the process of drafting a
new law on trade unions and a law on NGOs and Associations. Local
groups fear that these new laws are intended to restrict the lawful activities
of Cambodian civil society organisations. All three laws were highlighted as a priority by Prime
Minister Hun Sen in public statements, indicating that the current push was
orchestrated at the very highest levels of Government. 
 
In view of the information provided in the report, the Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders recommends to the authorities of
Cambodia:
-         
to guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of all human rights
defenders in Cambodia; 
-         
to put an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level,
against human rights defenders;
-         
to comply with the Cambodian
Constitution and the international and regional instruments ratified by
Cambodia as well as with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998;
-         
to issue an invitation to the
Special Rapporteur of the UN on the situation of human rights defenders so that
she visits the country.
  
At
the occasion of the launching of its report, the Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), invite
you to a 
 
Press Conference
on Thursday 2nd September 2010,
from 8.30 to 11.30 am
at Baitong
Restaurant
No.
7, Street 360, BKK1, Phnom Penh
 
 
For further information, please
contact:
·        
FIDH:
Fabien Maitre : + 33 1 43 55 25 18
·        
OMCT: Seynabou Benga: + 41 22 809 49 39
 



[1]The
Observatory’s mission was composed of Mr. Jens Tinga, trade union
representative (the Netherlands), Ms. Emilie Cuq, lawyer (France), and Mr. Will
Fitzgibbon, researcher (Australia). The mission was prepared with cooperation
from the International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC) as well as the
Cambodian League for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights (LICADHO) and
the Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association (ADHOC). 