Angola:  Publication of a Mission Report: “They want to keep us vulnerable”: Human Rights Defenders Under Pressure
March 19, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Reports and Publications / Angola / 2015 / MarchAngola: Publication of a Mission Report: “They want to keep us vulnerable”: Human Rights Defenders Under Pressure     Paris, Geneva, Pretoria, Luanda, March 19, 2015 – In a joint report released today, the Observatory and the Associação Justicia Paz e
Democracia (AJPD) depict an
environment where human rights defenders and journalists in Angola are
subjected to judicial and administrative harassment, acts of intimidation,
threats and other forms of restrictions to their freedom of association and
expression. Our organisations release this report while the trial of prominent
journalist and human rights defender, Rafael Marques de Morais will
commence next week in Luanda. The report also comes in a context where the
authorities of Angola have recently introduced a draft regulation aimed at
regulating the activities of NGOs which, if adopted by the President in its
current form, will considerably jeopardize any independent human rights
reporting in this country.    
 
“The authorities of Angola voluntarily maintain
human rights defenders and journalists in a situation of vulnerability. Unfair
trials, recurring harassment, acts of intimidation and restrictive legislations
are all methods of States which do not tolerate opposition. This situation must
come to an end and Angolan authorities must accept dissenting voices”, declared our organisations. 
 
On March 24, 2015, a trial on charges of criminal defamation will
commence in Luanda against  journalist
Rafael Marques de Morais. Marques is accused of defamation following the publication,
in 2011, of his book, “Blood Diamonds: Corruption and Torture in Angola”
where he denounces the corruption and human rights violations allegedly
committed by some state agents and business entrepreneurs in the diamond-mining
industry. The Observatory and AJPD call upon the authorities of Angola to drop
the charges for criminal defamation pending against Rafael Marques and conform
with regional and international recommendations calling upon the
de-criminalisation of defamation and the protection of human rights work. 
 
“Rafael Marques has been targeted by the authorities
for many years. This trial is another illustration of the regime's willingness
to hamper his freedom of expression and undermine his reporting on human rights
abuses committed in the sector of extractive industries. As illustrated in our
report, the procedural irregularities observed since Marques was indicted in
January 2013 clearly show that he may not benefit from a fair trial”, added our organisations. 
 
Recent attacks against human rights defenders
 
The report reveals that human rights defenders and journalists
denouncing issues deemed to be sensitive such as corruption, bad governance,
forced demolitions, forced evictions or the human rights situation in Cabinda
are the main targets of the authorities. Recent cases clearly illustrate this
trend: in Cabinda, on March 14, 2015, the police arbitrarily arrested Marcos
Mavungo, former member of the organisation Mpalabanda, and lawyer  Arão Bula Tempo, prior to a
demonstration which was planned the same day to denounce the human rights
abuses and bad governance prevailing in the province. Both men were transferred
to the provincial office for criminal investigation where they are still
detained. On March 16, they were both charged with “sedition”. The Observatory
and AJPD call upon the authorities to proceed to their immediate release and
put an end to what appears to be judicial harassment for human rights work. 
 
Earlier, on February 18, 2015, the offices of the organisation Omunga, an
organisation well-known for its stance against forced demolitions and
evictions, based in the province of Benguela, were burgled by two armed men,
dressed in military uniforms, who assaulted the guard and robbed a camera and a
phone. Despite the complaint filed by José Patrocino, the Coordinator of
Omunga, and while members of this organisation are often subjected to acts of
intimidation, no serious and impartial investigation has been conducted by the
police up to now. The Observatory and AJPD express serious concerns at these
recent events as they illustrate the increasing insecure environment in which
human rights defenders operate in Angola. Our organisations urge the
authorities to identify the authors of this burglary and to bring before an
independent tribunal. 
 
Attempt to further restrict freedom of association
 
Our organisations further express serious concerns about the
introduction, in February 2015, of a draft regulation on the activities of
NGOs, which was proposed by the Ministry of Social Assistance and Reinsertion
and the Service of External Intelligence. Under the guise of preventing
terrorism, the draft regulation, which is to be adopted by Presidential decree,
contains a number of provisions that, if applied, will considerably jeopardise
the work of independent human rights organisations in Angola. Among others, the
regulation requires NGOs to provide their certificate of registration to be
authorised to carry out their activities, failing which they risk suspension or
closure. However, as illustrated in the report, to date, most independent human
rights organisations, including AJPD, have still not received the said
certificate from the Ministry of Justice. Besides, several provisions of this
regulation will result in an increasing control exercised by the authorities
over the activities (design and planning of implementation), the accounts
(origin of funding) and the internal management of NGOs (employment of staff,
purchase of equipment). For example, NGOs will be required to solicit the
approval of the authorities prior to implementing projects, to implement
activities benefiting communities or purchasing equipment exclusively in the
country. The Observatory and AJPD urge the authorities to refrain from adopting
such restrictive regulation as it contravenes Angola's commitments and
obligations to respect freedom of association. 
 
Our organisations deplore the fact that “for many years,
structural impediments to the work of human rights defenders in Angola have
been commonplace. The NGO registration process remains complex, costly and
opaque and the NGO sector is crippled by a lack of human resources and
financial sustainability. The regulation, if adopted in its current form, might
simply lead to the extinction of independent human rights organisations in
Angola”.
 
The report
is available for download on the OMCT website:
in English: Angola_OBS_Report_2015.03.19_English and in Portuguese: Angola_OBS_Relatório_2015.03.19_Português
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders (OBS) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this
programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy to situations of repression
against human rights defenders.
 
For more information, please contact:
• FIDH:
Arthur Manet/Lucie Kröning: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
• OMCT:
Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 24
• AJPD: Maria
Lúcia da Silveira: + 244 993401023 