Azerbaijan:  Leyla and Arif Yunus finally out of the country to receive urgent medical treatment
April 19, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2016 / AprilAzerbaijan: Leyla and Arif Yunus finally out of the country to receive urgent medical treatment

Geneva-Paris,
April 19, 2016 - Human rights defenders Leyla and
Arif Yunus were today allowed to travel abroad to receive urgent medical
treatment after almost two years in jail and house arrest. The Observatory
(OMCT-FIDH partnership) now calls on the Azeri authorities to permit other
human rights defenders recently released to receive urgent medical care abroad. 

 
Leyla Yunus, Director of the Institute for
Peace and Democracy (IPD) and a member of OMCT General Assembly, and Arif Yunusov, Head of IPD Conflictology
Department, had in November and December 2015 respectively been assigned to
house arrest after spending nearly one year and a half in jail. Today, they
were finally allowed to travel to The Netherlands, where they could reunite with their daughter, before going to Germany to receive
urgent surgery and medical treatment for severe chronic conditions.
 
“We
are delighted that Leyla and Arif Yunus were at last allowed to travel abroad to receive life-saving treatment.
But we once more condemn the Azeri authorities for this slow decision and hold
them responsible for the deterioration of their health condition during their
arbitrary detention”,
said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock. “Their
sentences should also be quashed”.
 
Arif Yunusov
suffers from hypertension, and Leyla Yunus from hepatitis, diabetes,
pancreatitis and gallstone disease, which only got worse during her detention.
Yet, on February 11 and March 11, 2016 respectively, the Yasamal District Court
of Baku and the Court of Appeals in Baku had denied the Yunus couple permission
to temporarily leave the country to receive urgent medical treatment due to their
suspended prison terms. 
 
Leyla Yunus
and Arif Yunusov were arbitrarily detained for nearly one year and a half and
sentenced to 8,5 and 7 years of imprisonment respectively on August 13, 2015,
following a procedure that grossly disregarded international standards of fair
trial and due process. The Observatory reiterates its position that their
conviction had no legal grounds and merely aimed at sanctioning their
legitimate human rights activities. On December
9, 2015, their sentence was commuted to a release on probation for five years. 
 
“The
authorities of Azerbaijan should now allow other human rights defenders who were recently released to receive urgent
medical care abroad, including journalist Rauf Mirqadirov and human rights
lawyer Intigam Aliyev. The Azeri authorities should also release journalist Khadija
Ismayilova immediately and unconditionally”,
said FIDH Honorary President Souhayr Belhassen.
 
The
Observatory more generally calls on the Azeri authorities to conform in any
circumstances with the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, as
well as international and European standards such as the European Convention on
Human Rights and to put an end to all forms of harassment - including at the
judicial level - against all human rights defenders in the country.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH.
The objective of this partnership is to intervene to prevent or remedy
situations of repression against human rights defenders. 