China:  Closed-door trial and ongoing arbitrary detention of Mr. Huang Qi
January 16, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / China / 2019 / JanuaryChina: Closed-door trial and ongoing arbitrary detention of Mr. Huang Qi
New information
CHN 001 / 0119 / OBS 005
Arbitrary detention / 
Judicial harassment
China
January 16, 2019
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and FIDH, has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in China.
New information:
The Observatory has been informed by the Network
of Chinese Human Rights Defenders (NCHRD) about the closed-door trial
and ongoing arbitrary detention of Mr. Huang
Qi, founder and Director of the “64 Tianwang Human
Rights Center”, which documents and publishes reports
on human rights violations - including enforced disappearances and trafficking,
and complaints against government officials[1].
According to the information received, on January 14, 2019, Mr. Huang
Qi, who is seriously ill, was
secretly put on trial before the Mianyang City Intermediate Court in
Sichuan Province on charges of “illegally
providing State secrets to foreign entities” and “intentionally leaking State
secrets”. The Observatory is greatly concerned that, in clear violation of Mr.
Huang’s right to a fair trial, court proceedings were held
behind closed doors, no information about the trial
was made public and one of Mr. Huang’s lawyers, Mr. Liu Zhengqing, was
never informed about the hearing.
Mr.
Huang Qi is being detained in Mianyang City Detention Centre. At the time of
publication of this Urgent Appeal, the court has not yet announced a verdict.
The
Observatory strongly condemns the ongoing judicial harassment and arbitrary
detention of Mr. Huang Qi, which seems to
be merely aimed at punishing him for his legitimate and peaceful human rights
activities, and remains deeply concerned about his health and conditions of
detention. His health has indeed seriously deteriorated while in detention (see
background information).
The
Observatory is further concerned that Mr. Huang Qi’s
85-year-old mother has been a victim of enforced disappearance by the Chinese authorities
since early December 2018. Her fate and whereabouts remain unknown to this day.
The
Observatory recalls that in April 2018, the United Nations (UN) Working Group on Arbitrary Detention issued an opinion[2]
that declared Mr. Huang’s detention arbitrary. However, Chinese government continues
to ignore the Working Group’s recommendation that Mr. Huang be released and
compensated. In December 2018, four UN Special Rapporteurs further expressed serious concerns about his
deteriorating health[3].

The
Observatory urges Chinese authorities to immediately and unconditionally
release Mr Huang Qi and his mother, and to
ensure their psychological well-being and physical integrity. In particular, the Observatory calls on the authorities to
give Mr. Huang an immediate and unconditional access to medical
treatment.
Background information[4]:
Mianyang city police in Sichuan Province initially detained Mr. Huang Qi
on November 28, 2016 and arrested him the following month on charges of
“illegally providing State secrets to foreign entities.” A trial scheduled for
June 20, 2018 was suspended without any official reason provided. In October 2018
police added an additional charge of “leaking State secrets”.
For
the first 10 months of his detention, police did not allow him any access to a
lawyer. Once granted access to legal counsel, Mr. Huang reported to his lawyers
different forms of torture and other ill-treatment,
including extended interrogations,
prolonged periods of being forced to stand, and beatings in attempt to force him to
confess.
Moreover
Mr. Huang Qi is not receiving adequate medical care
in detention and his health has seriously deteriorated. Mr. Huang
suffers from a chronic kidney disease which requires daily
medication, hydrocephalus (accumulation of fluid in the brain), heart
disease and dangerously high blood pressure. In
October 2018, Mr. Huang told his lawyer that Sichuan authorities had purposely
understated the dire state of his health and had tried to cover up his actual
condition. Authorities have repeatedly rejected applications for his release on
medical bail. 
Lawyers representing Mr. Huang Qi have also faced retaliation. One of his lawyers, Mr. Sui
Muqing, was disbarred in February 2018 for defending human rights defenders, including Mr.
Huang. The Guangdong judicial bureau has begun
disbarment proceedings against Mr.
Huang’s current lawyer, Liu Zhengqing, in
reprisals for his work.
Mr. Huang Qi established China’s first-known human rights monitoring
website in 1998, disseminating reports about Chinese individuals who had been
trafficked and subjected to enforced disappearance. In the past he has served
two prison sentences, totalling eight years, in reprisal for his human rights
work, and was often tortured and subjected to ill-treatment.
Actions requested: 
Please write to the authorities in China, urging them to:
i. Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical integrity and
psychological well-being of Mr. Huang Qi and of his mother, as well as
of all human rights defenders in China;
ii. Immediately give Mr. Huang Qi access to an adequate medical
treatment and more generally ensure that adequate conditions of detention and medical
services are guaranteed to all persons that have been deprived of liberty and detained
in China, according notably to the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the
Treatment of Prisoners;
iii. Immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Huang Qi and his mother
as their detention is arbitrary since it only seems to aim at punishing them
for their human rights activities;
iv. Put an end to all acts of harassment - including at the judicial
level - against Mr. Huang Qi and all human rights defenders in
China, and ensure in all circumstances that they are able to carry out their
legitimate activities without any hindrance and fear of reprisals;
v. Conform to the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9,
1998, in particular with Articles 1 and 12.2;
vi. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by China.
Addresses: 
·          
Mr. Li Keqiang,
Prime Minister of the People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 659 611 09 (c/o
Ministry of Foreign Affairs), Email: premier@mail.gov.cn
·          
Mr. Guo Shengkun,
Minister of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10
63099216, Email: gabzfwz@mps.gov.cn
·          
H.E. Mr. Zhaoxu
Ma, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China to the
United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 793 70 14, E-mail: chinamission_gva@mfa.gov.cn
·          
H.E. Mr. QU XING,
Ambassador, Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in Brussels, Belgium,
Fax: +32-2-7792895; Email: chinaemb_be@mfa.gov.cn
Please also write to the
diplomatic representations of China located in your country.
***
Geneva-Paris, January 16, 2019
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting
the code of this appeal in your reply.
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this
programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.



[1] http://www.64tianwang.com/ 


[2] https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/Detention/Opinions/Session81/A_HRC_WGAD_2018_22.pdf


[3] https://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=24036&LangID=E



[4] See
Observatory Joint Statement, published on November 5, 2018. 