Cambodia:  Bail denied to 21 protesters
February 11, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2014 / FebruaryCambodia: Bail denied to 21 protestersPress Release2 pages / 320 KB
PRESS RELEASE
Cambodia: Bail denied to 21 protesters
Geneva, February
11th, 2014. The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), the
principal global civil society coalition against torture, expresses concern about
the ongoing detention of 21 of a group of 23 protesters, including 3 human
rights defenders, who were arrested during protests over garment factory wages and the political situation
in the country throughout Phnom Penh early January 2014.
On February 11th, 2014, the Phnom Penh Court
of Appeal denied bail to 21 protesters[1],
including three human rights defenders, namely Vorn Pao, President of the Independent Democratic of Informal
Economic Association (IDEA), which works for the promotion of worker’s rights,
land and housing rights, Then Saveurn,
Coordinator of the Coalition of Cambodian Farmer Community (CCFC), and Chan Putisak, a famous Boeng Kak Lake
activist. The 21 individuals, who remain detained at the Correctional Center 3
(“CC3”) in Kampong Cham province, were not present for the closed hearing. OMCT
has been informed that two other men, Bou
Sarith and Yon Sok Chea, who
were among the 23 protesters arrested early January, were granted bail during a
hearing on February 7th, 2014 and released under judicial
supervision the next day. 
Vorn Pao, Then Soveon and Chan Putisak were arrested
along with seven other individuals on January 2nd, 2014 during a
protest on National Road 4, in front of Yak Jin factory, in Phnom Penh demanding
for a greater increase of the minimum wage. 13 others individuals were arrested
on January 3rd, 2014 near Canadia Industrial Park. They were all
charged under Article 411 “Intentionally causing damage with aggravating
circumstances” and Article 218 “Acts of violence with aggravating circumstances”
of the Penal Code 2009 and face up to five year’s imprisonment and fines from
$1’000 - $ 2’500. 
Today’s ruling upheld the decision of the Phnom Penh
Municipal Court, which had denied bail to all 23 individuals on the basis of
ending crime, preventing new crime and ensuring detainees are available for
trial. 
OMCT had earlier condemned the violent crackdown and
excessive use of force by security forces on various protests throughout Phnom
Penh early January 2014 by garments workers, monks, victims of forced evictions
and supporters of the opposition Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP), which
led to the death of at least four persons and the arrest of the aforementioned
23 protesters. 
OMCT had also been informed that the 23 protesters
were held incommunicado by the authorities for five days, without access to
lawyers, medical care or their families, after their arrest. The authorities
eventually revealed on January 7th, 2014 that they were being held
at CC3. According to latest information, civil society groups have still not
been allowed to visit them. 
OMCT urges the competent authorities to guarantee the
physical and psychological integrity of all aforementioned individuals at all
times and to ensure that they have access to their families, lawyers, medical
professionals and civil society groups. 
OMCT further recalls the UN
Human Rights Council resolutions 19/35 (preambular para. 11) and
22/10 (preambular para. 16),
stressing that “peaceful protests should not be viewed as a threat, and
therefore […] all States [should] engage in an open, inclusive and meaningful
dialogue when dealing with peaceful protests and their causes”.
Accordingly, OMCT calls on the Cambodian authorities to immediately and
unconditionally release all the persons currently detained and drop the charges
against the above-mentioned activists, as they seem to be aimed at merely
sanctioning their peaceful exercise of their freedom of association, assembly
and expression.
Furthermore, OMCT
urges the Government of Cambodia to immediately lift the ban on all
demonstrations and marches. 
Finally, OMCT urges the competent authorities to publish
the findings of the investigation into the excessive use of force during the protests
early January 2014, and to bring those responsible for causing death or injury
through such use of force, before a competent, independent and impartial
tribunal. 

Contact: 
OMCT, Tel. +41 22 809 49 39



[1] Sokun Sombathpiseth, Chhim Theurn, Yong Som
An, Reth Roatha, Nakry Vanda, Lun San, Teng Chany, Chea Sarath, Mam Piseth,
Neup Sokhourn, Phang Tren, Ry Sinoun, Heng Ratha, Pang Vanny, Pheurn Da, Cheurn
Yong, Ros Sophoan and Prong Sarath. 