Russian Federation:  Denial of adequate medical examination and treatment to Ms. Taisia Osipova
July 25, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2011 / JulyRussian Federation: Denial of adequate medical examination and treatment to Ms. Taisia OsipovaRUS 250711
Denial of medical care/ Ill-treatment/
Due process violations/ Lack of an effective investigation/ Fear for the safety
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in
the following situation intheRussian Federation.
Brief Description of the Situation
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been
informed by the Russian-Chechen Friendship Society (RCFS), a member
organisation of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the denial of adequate medical examination and treatment to Ms. Taisia
Osipova, a 26-year-old resident of Smolensk, province of Smolensk, since
her arrest, on 23 November 2010, although she is suffering from multiple
chronic diseases. She is currently detained in poor conditions at the pre-trial
detention centre (SIZO) 1, in Smolensk. 
According to the information
received, Ms. Taisia Osipova was arrested at home, in Smolensk, by around 20 policemen and officers from the
Department to Combat Extremism of the Russian
Federation, on 23 November 2010. The officers reportedly violently entered Ms. Taisia Osipova’s house and
went from one room to another turning everything upside down while forcing Ms.
Taisia Osipova to stay with her 6-year-old daughter in one of the rooms. Ms. Taisia Osipova was brought to the
pre-trial detention centre (SIZO) 1, in Smolensk, after the officers allegedly found five
packs of greyish substance among her daughter's clothes and a marked 500-ruble
note. During the arrest, Ms. Taisia Osipova sustained injuries on her arms. The
policemen also allegedly severely beat and used electroshocks on the family’s
dog in front of Ms. Tiasia Osipova’s daughter, who then remained locked alone
two hours in the bathroom. She was later taken to her aunt by the police.
According to the same
information received, Ms. Taisia Osipova was later charged with “illegal
distribution of drugs” by the Zadneprovskyi district court, in Smolensk, and she was
remanded in custody pending investigation. Since her arrest, Ms. Taisia Osipova has reportedly
suffered pressure by officers of the Department to Combat Extremism in order to
obtain a confession to the alleged aforementioned crime and information about
her husband, who is a senior member of the political opposition party, Drugaya
Russia[1].The
pressure has reportedly included threats to remove her parental right over her
daughter if she refuses to collaborate, poor conditions of detention and denial
of adequate medical examination and treatment, although she has been suffering
from sugar diabetes, pancreatitis, chronic pyelonephritis and chronic
toxic-allergic hepatitis[2].

Since January 2011, Ms. Taisia Osipova's lawyers had
also presented several requests for a complete medical check-up of Ms. Taisia
Osipova on the basis of Article 110, paragraph 1.1 of the Code of Criminal
Procedures of the Russian Federation, which allows for the provisional release
from pre-trial detention of individuals with serious health conditions
(including diabetes type 1), but to no avail. Ms. Taisia Osipova's lawyer
subsequently filed a civil lawsuit before the Leninskiy district court of Smolensk. On 16 June 2011, the court reportedly ordered the prison
administration to ensure a medical examination of Ms. Taisia Osipova. 
On 6 July 2011, Ms. Taisia Osipova was reportedly
transferred to the regional hospital of Smolensk but without any prior announcement to her
family and lawyer, or any explanation about this transfer. She was kept two days alone in a hospital room
guarded by two security officers and handcuffed to her bed, including during
the night (she was also handcuffed when she went to the toilets). She was
denied some personal belongings too. On 7
July 2011, Ms. Taisia Osipova was reportedly examined at the
endocrinology department of the hospital. The medical conclusions, which were
subsequently presented to the court, reportedly only listed the results of the
ultrasound, urine and blood tests that were carried out. No diagnosis was
allegedly established by the doctors. It is feared that the examination was not
thoroughly conducted and no diagnosis established to minimize her medical
condition. 
According to the same information received, while she
was at the hospital, Ms. Taisia Osipova's family and lawyers were not allowed
to visit her, although these latter needed to consult her in order to prepare a
court session that had been fixed for 8 July 2011. Her lawyers reportedly
requested a postponement of the court hearing which was granted, however only
for a few hours. The court hearing before the Smolensk Zadneprovskiy district court
eventually took place on 8 July 2011 at 2.p.m, during which the aforementioned
medical conclusions were presented. Her lawyers asked anew for an independent
medical examination, including a drug-addiction test after the prosecutor
reportedly accused Ms. Taisia Osipova to be a drug addict. However, this
request was denied. Ms. Taisia Ospivoa’s detention was extended until 11
October 2011,
decision that was upheld by the regional court on 21 July 2011. A new court hearing was set for 11 and 12
August 2011 by the
Zadneprovskiy district court. 
OMCT has also been informed that, since 15
July 2011,
peaceful demonstrations have been held in Moscow to protest against Ms. Taisia Osipova's
unlawful detention and conditions of detention. More than hundred individuals have been
reportedly arrested since the beginning of the demonstrations, among them
several were injured during the arrest. They have been charged under article 19,
part 3 (“offering resistance to the police”) and article 20, part. 2
(“participating in an unauthorized rally”) of the Russian Administration Code.
The International Secretariat of OMCT is concerned
about the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Taisia Osipova. OMCT
fears that adequate medical examination and treatment are being denied to Ms.
Taisia Osipova to keep pressure on her. OMCT is also concerned about her
conditions of detention and the circumstances of her arrest.
OMCT recalls that the Russian Federation is legally
bound to effectively ensure the physical and psychological integrity of all
persons deprived of liberty in accordance with regional and international human
rights law, and in particular, the European Convention on Human Rights, the
recommendations of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the UN Standard Minimum
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. 
Actions requested
Please write to the authorities of the Russian Federation urging them to:
i.                    
Guarantee, in all
circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Taisia Osipova and of her family;
ii.                  
Grant Ms. Taisia Osipova
full access to her lawyers and her family; 
iii.                 
Guarantee that she is
promptly examined by independent doctors and receives adequate and free medical
care, in accordance with, inter alia, the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the
Treatment of Prisoners;
iv.                
Order her immediate release in the absence
of valid legal charges and judicial process consistent with international
legal standards, or if such charges exist, bring her
before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee her procedural rights
at all times; 
v.                  
Carry out a prompt,
effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into these events,
in particular into the circumstance of her arrest, the alleged pressure by officers of the
Department to Combat Extremism in order to obtain a confession, including the conditions of detention and the denial to grant her
adequate medical examination and treatment, the result of which must be made
public, in order to bring those responsible before a competent, independent and
impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as
provided by law;
vi.                
Ensure that adequate, effective and prompt reparation,
including adequate compensation and rehabilitation, is granted to the victim
concerned; 
vii.               
Guarantee
the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country
in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
ØPresident of the Russian
Federation, Dmitry Anatolyevich
Medvedev, Kremlin, Moscow, Russia, Fax:+ 7 495 206
5173 / 230 2408, Email: president@gov.ru;
ØProsecutor General of the Russian
Federation, Yuri
Chayka, 125993, Moskva K-31, Ul. B. Dimitrovka, d 15a, Russian
Federation, Fax: + 7 (495)692-17-25; 
ØChairwoman of the Presidential
Human Rights Commission of the Russian Federation, Ella Pamfilova, 103132 g.
Moskva, Staraya ploshchad, d 8/5,pod 3, Russian Federation, Fax: +7 495 20 64
855; 
ØRussian Federal
Ombudsman for Human Rights, Vladimir Lukin, Fax: +7
495 207-74-70;
ØMinister of Internal
Affairs, Rashid Nurgaliev, ul. Zhitnaya, 16, 117049 Moscow, Russian
Federation, Telegram: Rossiia, 117049,
Moskva, Fax: + 7 495 237 49 25; 
ØPermanent Mission of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations in Geneva Av. de la Paix 15, CH-1211, Geneva
20, Switzerland, E-mail : mission.russian@ties.itu.int, fax: +41 22 734 40 44; 
Please
also write to the embassies of the Russian Federation in your respective country.
*******
Geneva, 25 July 2011
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.



[1] Drugaya Russia is a non-registered party that was created on the basis of the
coalition under the same name after it fell apart. The coalition was the moving
force of Dissenters' Marches held in the period of 2006 to 2008.


[2] See OMCT Open letter to the President of the Russian Federation sent on 21 June 2011. 