Myanmar (ex-Burma):  Arbitrary detention and sentencing of Mr. Thein Aung Myint
April 27, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Myanmar (ex-Burma) / 2015 / AprilMyanmar (ex-Burma): Arbitrary detention and sentencing of Mr. Thein Aung Myint
URGENT APPEAL - THE 
OBSERVATORY
New information
MMR 002 / 0315 / OBS 
021.1
Sentence / Arbitrary detention 
/
Judicial 
harassment
Burma / Myanmar
April 
24, 2015
The Observatory for the Protection 
of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for 
Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has 
received new information and requests your urgent intervention in the following 
situation in Burma / Myanmar.
New 
information:
 
The Observatory has been informed 
by reliable sources of the arbitrary detention and sentencing of Mr. Thein 
Aung Myint, member of the Movement for Democracy Current Force (MDCF). MDCF 
is a community-based organisation that campaigns against land-grabbing and other 
human rights violations. Thein Aung Myint is a human rights defender who has 
been working to help communities to advocate for their rights, including land 
rights. He is also a former political prisoner. He was detained in 1994, 2007, 
2009, 2010, and 2012 for his peaceful protest activities.
According to the information 
received, on April 23, 2015, a court in Mandalay’s Aung Myay Thar San Township 
sentenced Mr. Thein Aung Myint to six months in prison under Article 18 of the 
Act on the Right to Peaceful Assembly and Peaceful Procession for participating 
in a peaceful protest on October 27, 2014, in Mandalay. The protest called for 
an investigation into the October 4, 2014, extrajudicial killing of journalist 
Aung Kyaw Naing, aka Par Gyi.
Although Mr. Thein Aung Myint had 
applied for permission from township authorities to hold the protest, 
authorities refused to grant it. In addition, 
Mr. Thein Aung Myint was not 
present when the protest began, since it started while he was speaking with 
local authorities, who had called to inform him that they had rejected his 
protest application. He arrived at the site when the protest was close to its 
end.
Although about 200 people took 
part in the October 27 demonstration, Mr. Thein Aung Myint was the only person 
charged and held responsible as he initially filed the application for the 
protest. His colleague Mr. Aye Thein testified to the court that he [Aye 
Thein] had led the protest and offered to present photos of himself holding a 
bullhorn and leading protest chants.
Mr. Thein Aung Myint had already 
been sentenced on March 23, 2015, to six months in prison on the same legal 
grounds for leading a peaceful protest on March 27, 2014, against electricity 
price hikes (see background information). He is currently detained in Mandalay’s 
Oh Bo Prison.
The Observatory condemns the 
arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Mr. Thein Aung Myint, which 
merely aim at sanctioning his peaceful human rights activities, and calls for 
his immediate and unconditional release.
The Observatory is further 
concerned about MDCF members being the targets of frequent judicial harassments 
and arbitrary imprisonments.
Background 
information:
On March 23, 2015, a court in 
Mandalay’s Chan Aye Thar Zan Township sentenced MDCF members Messrs. Thein Aung 
Myint and Saw Hla Aung to six months in prison under Article 18 of the 
Act on the Right to Peaceful Assembly and Peaceful Procession for leading a 
peaceful protest against electricity price hikes on March 27, 2014.
The court also sentenced two other 
people, Mr. Kyaw Myo Htun and Ms. Khet Khet Tin, to six months 
under the same law in connection with the March 27 protests, even though they 
were not involved in the demonstration. Mr. Kyaw Myo Htun only observed and 
applauded the protesters, while Ms. Khet Khet Tin, who is Mr. Thein Aung Myint's 
wife, was shopping in the area at the time the protest took place. When she saw 
that authorities were arresting her husband, she asked them not to use excessive 
force in the process. The four are currently detained in Mandalay’s Oh Bo 
Prison. Ms. Khet Khet Tin will appeal the sentence.
Mr. Thein Aung Myint had applied 
for permission from township authorities to hold the March 27 protest. However, 
authorities refused to grant permission on the grounds that Thein Aung Myint was 
not a resident of that township. About 100 people took part in the 
demonstration.
Actions requested:
Please write to the authorities of 
Burma, urging them to:
i.               
Guarantee in all circumstances the 
physical and psychological integrity of Messrs. Thein Aung Myint, Saw Hla Aung 
and Kyaw Myo Htun and Ms. Khet Khet Tin, as well as of all human rights 
defenders in Burma;
ii.              
Release Messrs. Thein Aung Myint, 
Saw Hla Aung and Kyaw Myo Htun and Ms. Khet Khet Tin immediately and 
unconditionally as their detention is arbitrary and seems aimed at sanctioning 
their human rights activities;
iii.            
Put 
an end to acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against them as 
well as against all human rights defenders in Burma;
iv.             
Comply with all the provisions of 
the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular with 
its: 
-        
Article 1, which stipulates that 
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to promote 
and to strive for the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental 
freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-        
Article 6(a), which states that 
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to 
participate in peaceful activities against violations of human rights and 
fundamental freedoms”;
-        
Article 12.2, which provides that 
“the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the 
competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, 
against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure 
adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a 
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the 
present Declaration”;
v.              
More generally, ensure in all 
circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in 
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and ratify 
international and regional human rights instruments. 
Addresses:
·       
U 
Thein Sein, President of Myanmar, President Office, Office No.18, Naypyitaw, 
MYANMAR; Fax: + 95 1 652 624
·       
Lt 
Gen Ko Ko, Minister for Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Office No. 10, 
Naypyitaw, MYANMAR; Fax: +95 67 412 439
·       
U 
Win Mra, Chairman of the Myanmar National Human Rights Commission, 27 Pyay Road, 
Hline Township, Yangon, Republic of the Union of Myanmar; Fax: 
+95-1-659668
·       
Dr. 
Tun Shin, Attorney General, Office of the Attorney General, Office No. 25, 
Naypyitaw, MYANMAR; Fax: +95 67 404 146/ 106
·       
U 
Tun Tun Oo, Chief Justice, Office of the Supreme Court, Office No. 24, 
Naypyitaw, MYANMAR; Fax: + 95 67 404 059
·       
U 
Kyaw Kyaw Htun, Director General, Myanmar Police Force, Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Office No. 10, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR; Fax: +951 549 663 / 549 
208
·       
H.E. Mr. Maung Wai, Ambassador 
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative to the United 
Nations in Geneva, Avenue Blanc 47, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 732 89 
19, +41 22 732 73 77, Email: mission@myanmargeneva.org
·       
Embassy of Myanmar in Brussels, 
Boulevard Général Wahis 9, 1030 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 (0)32 2 705 50 48, 
Email: mebrussels@skynet.be
Please also write to the 
diplomatic representations of Burma in your respective countries. 