Russian Federation:  Denial of adequate medical examination and treatment_Fear for the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Taisia Osipova
June 21, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2011 / JuneRussian Federation: Denial of adequate medical examination and treatment_Fear for the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Taisia Osipova​OPEN
LETTER TO MR. DMITRY ANATOLYEVICH MEDVEDEVPRESIDENT
OF THE RUSSIAN
FEDERATION 
Via Fax: + 7 495 206 5173 / 230 2408
Email: president@gov.ru
            
Geneva, 21 June 2011
Re: Fear for the physical and psychological integrity of Ms.
Taisia Osipova – Denial of adequate medical treatment 
Your
Excellency,
The World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), the largest Network of NGOs fighting against torture,
summary executions, enforced disappearances and all other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment in the world, is writing to you to express
its concern about the serious health problems of Ms. Taisia Osipova, 26 years old, who is currently detained in poor
conditions in the pre-trial detention centre (SIZO) 1, in Smolensk, province of
Smolensk. She has been denied adequate medical treatment since her arrest on 23 November 2010, although she is suffering from
multiple chronic diseases. 
OMCT has been informed by reliable
sources that, on 23 November 2010, around 20 policemen and
officers from the Department to Combat Extremism entered violently Ms. Taisia
Osipova’s house, in Smolensk. The officers reportedly
went from one room to another turning everything upside down while forcing Ms.
Taisia Osipova to stay with her daughter in one of the rooms. Ms. Taisia
Osipova was arrested and brought to the pre-trial detention centre (SIZO) 1, in
Smolensk, after the officers allegedly found
five packs of greyish substance among her daughter's clothes and a marked 500-ruble
note. Upon arrival at the detention centre, she was examined by a prison doctor
only for bruises on her arms that she sustained during the arrest. 
Ms. Taisia Osipova was later charged
with illegal distribution of drugs by the Zadneprovskiy district court, in Smolensk, and she was remanded in
custody pending investigation. On 3 May 2011, the court refused to
release her on bail. The following hearing has been scheduled for 21 June 2011.  
Since her arrest, Ms. Taisia Osipova
has reportedly suffered pressure by officers of the Department to Combat
Extremism in order to obtain a confession to the alleged aforementioned crime and
information about her husband, who is a senior member of the political
opposition party, Drugaya Russia[1].The
pressure has reportedly included threats to remove her parental right over her
daughter if she refuses to collaborate; poor conditions of detention (she is
held in a tiny cell with six more persons although the cell is meant for four
persons, with no running water. Despite the temperature of more than 20
degrees, the windows are tightly shut up with two frames. The official Russian
radio is reportedly on the whole day which makes it impossible to have any
rest) and denial of adequate medical treatment, although she has been suffering
from sugar diabetes, pancreatitis, chronic pyelonephritis and chronic
toxic-allergic hepatitis. 

According to the same information received, Ms. Taisia Osipova was diagnosed
with sugar diabetes type 1 in 2005, at the Hospital of Smolensk. She had been under
insulin treatment and she had been controlling her sugar level with a
glucometer since then. However, she has been denied adequate medical follow-up,
including the use of a glucometer, and she has not been provided a diabetic
diet since her arrest. In December 2010, she reportedly suffered a hypoglycemic
coma but she was neither hospitalised nor examined by a prison doctor. She was
only later in the month examined by a prison doctor who reportedly diagnosed a
diabetes type 2, although she had been suffering from diabetes type 1 since
2005. Ms. Taisia Osipova was informed about the result only through her lawyer,
who himself got the information from the media. 
Ms. Taisia Osipova had
also been under medical treatment for chronic pyelonephritis, pancreatitis and
chronic toxic-allergic hepatitis, diseases that were diagnosed in 2009, at the
Uromed hospital, in Smolensk. Nevertheless, she has also
not been provided with adequate medical care for these diseases since her
arrest. After several requests to the prison administration, an ultrasound
scanning was eventually conducted on Ms. Taisia Ospivoa in March 2011. However,
she only received the medical report in May 2011 and it reportedly stated that
she did not suffer from any of the aforementioned diseases. It is feared that
the report was fabricated. OMCT has also been informed that the prison
authorities have threatened Ms. Taisia Osipova with reprisals, including
solitary confinement, if she would continue to complain about her conditions of
detention and the lack of adequate medical treatment. 
At the same time, Ms. Taisia
Osipova's lawyer reportedly presented several requests for a complete medical
check-up of Ms. Taisia Osipova on the basis of Article 110, paragraph 1.1 of
the Code of Criminal Procedures of the Russian Federation, which allows for the
provisional release from pre-trial detention of individuals with serious health
conditions (including diabetes type 1), but to no avail. Ms. Taisia Osipova's
lawyer subsequently filed a lawsuit before the Leninskiy district court of Smolensk. On 16 June 2011, the court reportedly ordered the
prison administration to ensure a medical examination of Ms. Taisia Osipova. To
date, no such medical examination was carried out. 
The International Secretariat of
OMCT is concerned about the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Taisia
Osipova. OMCT has been informed that Ms. Taisia Osipova's health has
deteriorated. She has lost weight and suffers from accrue pain in the kidneys
area. She has also reportedly developed allergy to some unidentified source. OMCT
fears that adequate medical examination and treatment are being denied to Ms.
Taisia Osipova to put pressure on her. OMCT is concern also about her
conditions of detention and the circumstances of her arrest. 
OMCT recalls that the Russian
Federation is legally bound to effectively ensure the physical and
psychological integrity of all persons deprived of liberty in accordance with
regional and international human rights law, and in particular, the European
Convention on Human Rights, the recommendations of the European Committee for
the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the UN
Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. 
Accordingly, OMCT calls on the competent
authorities to ensure that Ms. Taisia Osipova is promptly examined by
independent doctors and that she receives adequate medical treatment. OMCT also
urges the competent authorities to release her in the
absence of valid legal charges and judicial process consistent with
international legal standards, or if such charges
exist, bring her before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee her
procedural rights at all times. 
OMCT hopes that the
concerns expressed in this letter will receive the attention they deserve. 
Yours sincerely 
                                                                             
Eric
Sottas                                
Secretary
General, OMCT                                                                                                                  



[1] Drugaya Russia is a non-registered party
that was created on the basis of the coalition under the same name after it
fell apart. The coalition was the moving force of Dissenters' Marches held in the period of
2006 to 2008. 