2017 Martin Ennals Award for Human Rights Defenders goes to Mohamed Zaree
October 10, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2017 / October2017 Martin Ennals Award for Human Rights Defenders goes to Mohamed Zaree





Mohamed
Zaree was selected by a jury of 10 global human rights organizations (See list below). The Award is given to human
rights defenders who have shown deep commitment to human rights and face great
personal risk. The aim of the award is to provide protection through
international recognition. Strongly supported by the City of Geneva, the Award was
presented by the United Nations Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights on
October 10th at the University of Geneva.
 Mohamed Zaree (Egypt)Mohamed Zaree is
a devoted human rights activist and legal scholar whose work focuses on human
rights advocacy around freedom of expression and association. He is also known
for his role as the Egypt Country Director of the Cairo Institute for Human
Rights Studies (CIHRS), which works throughout the Arabic speaking world. He
assumed this role after government pressure on CIHRS prompted them to relocate
their headquarters to Tunis in 2014. The
Egyptian government has been escalating its pressure on the human rights
movement. Human rights NGOs and defenders are confronted with a growing wave of
threats, harassment, and intimidation, legal and otherwise. Despite this, Zaree
is leading CIHRS’ research, human rights education, and national advocacy
initiatives in Egypt and is shaping the media debate on human rights
issues. During this critical period for civil society, he is also leading the
Forum of Independent Egyptian Human Rights NGOs, a network aiming to unify
human rights groups in advocacy. Zaree’s initiatives have helped NGOs to
develop common approaches to human rights issues in Egypt. Within
the context of the renewed crackdown on Egyptian human rights organizations, he
has become a leading figure in Egypt’s human rights movement. Zaree is
currently facing
investigation under the “Foreign Funding Case” and is at high risk of
prosecution and life imprisonment. The “Foreign Funding Case” highly restricts
NGO activities. Despite this, Zaree continues to engage the authorities in
dialogue wherever possible, arguing that respect for human rights will increase
stability in Egypt. Zaree
has been under a travel ban since May 2016. He remains present and active in
Egypt and represents CIHRS inside the country.  Martin Ennals Foundation
Chair Dick Oosting stated: “Severe restriction of civil society’s space to
express itself is what led Mohamed Zaree to advocate for human rights and fight
for the freedom of association. He is still paying the price for his courageous
acts, and we urge his government to lift the travel ban.”***The two other
finalists received Martin Ennals Prizes: Karla Avelar (El Salvador)Karla Avelar, a transgender woman in El Salvador, founded the country’s
first organization of transgender women - COMCAVIS TRANS. She grew up on the
streets, suffering discrimination, violence, sexual exploitation, rape, and
attempted murder. She works to change national legislation and the authorities’
practices, by publicizing violations suffered by LGBTI people. Her advocacy
helped prompt the authorities to segregate LGBTI prisoners for their own
safety, and provide HIV treatment. As a result of
her human rights work she has faced many death
threats, in a context of
alarming violence levels against the LGBTI community in El Salvador. FreeThe5KH
(Cambodia) FreeThe5KH are five human rights
defenders who were recently
released after 427 days of pre-trial
detention. They are awaiting trial and are banned from travel. There were
widespread international calls for their unconditional release, and a stop to
judicial harassment of human rights defenders in Cambodia. This comes in the
context of an increasingly severe crackdown on civil society and the political
opposition in Cambodia. ***The main award of
the human rights movement. The
Martin Ennals Award for Human Rights Defenders (MEA) is a unique collaboration
among ten of the world’s leading human rights organizations to give protection to human rights defenders
worldwide.  The Jury is composed of the following NGOs: - Amnesty International- EWDE Germany- FIDH- Front Line Defenders- Human Rights First- Human Rights Watch- HURIDOCS- International Commission of Jurists- International Service for Human Rights- World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) Electronic version
with video: http://bit.ly/2xufGUU For further information, please contact: Michael Khambatta +41 79 474 8208





khambatta@martinennalsaward.org
or visit www.martinennalsaward.org 