Thailand:  Five years on, international organizations renew their call for the release of Somyot Phrueksakasemsuk
April 29, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2016 / AprilThailand: Five years on, international organizations renew their call for the release of Somyot Phrueksakasemsuk

 
On the eve of
the five-year anniversary of his detention, we, the undersigned international organizations,
condemn the ongoing and arbitrary deprivation of liberty of human rights
defender Somyot Phrueksakasemsuk and call on Thailand’s authorities to
immediately and unconditionally release him. 
Somyot, 54, is
currently incarcerated in Bangkok’s Remand Prison, where he is serving a 10-year
sentence following his conviction on charges of lèse-majesté under Article 112
of Thailand’s Criminal Code. Article 112 states that “whoever defames, insults
or threatens the King, the Queen, the Heir to the throne or the Regent shall be
punished with imprisonment of three to 15 years.” This imprisonment is in
addition to one more year, which was an earlier suspended sentence for
defamation in another case.
 
Several UN human
rights monitoring bodies have voiced concern over Somyot’s deprivation of
liberty. In an opinion issued on 30 August 2012, the UN Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention (WGAD) affirmed that Somyot’s detention was arbitrary. The
WGAD called on Thai authorities to release Somyot and award him compensation.
 
A former labor
rights activist and magazine editor, Somyot was arrested on 30 April 2011, five
days after he launched a petition campaign to collect 10,000 signatures
required for a parliamentary review of Article 112. On 23 January 2013, the Bangkok
Criminal Court sentenced him to 10 years in prison on two counts of
lèse-majesté. Somyot was convicted for allowing the publication of two
satirical articles in the now-defunct magazine Voice of Taksin, of which he was the editor. The articles were authored
by someone else and deemed by the Thai authorities to have insulted King
Bhumibol Adulyadej.
 
On 19 September 2014,
the Court of Appeal upheld the Bangkok Criminal Court’s lèse-majesté conviction
of Somyot. The Court of Appeal failed to notify Somyot, his lawyer, and his
family members that the hearing would take place on that day. On 19 November
2014, Somyot filed an appeal to the Supreme Court against his conviction.
 
Somyot’s
conviction and his detention do not comply with Thailand’s international legal obligations.
Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),
to which Thailand is a state party, provides that everyone has the right to
freedom of expression. This right includes “freedom to seek, receive, and impart
information and ideas of all kinds.”
 
In its
authoritative General Comment on Article 19, the UN Human Rights Committee
(HRC), the body that monitors compliance with the provisions of the ICCPR by state
parties, has affirmed that “all public figures, including those exercising the
highest political authority such as heads of state and government, are
legitimately subject to criticism and political opposition.” The HRC
specifically expressed concern regarding lèse-majesté laws and stated that
“imprisonment is never an appropriate penalty” for defamation.
 
On 23 September 2014, the UN Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) voiced its disappointment over the Court
of Appeal’s ruling that upheld Somyot's conviction. On 11 August 2015, OHCHR urged
Thailand to amend the “vague and broad” lèse-majesté law to bring it in line
with international human rights standards. OHCHR also called for the immediate
release of all those who had been jailed for the exercise of their right to
freedom of expression.
 
We also condemn
the flaws and delays in the judicial proceedings against Somyot and the courts’
repeated refusals to grant him bail. Somyot has unsuccessfully petitioned for
bail 16 times - the last time in November 2014.
 
Somyot is one of
the few lèse-majesté defendants who have appealed their convictions up to the
Supreme Court. Somyot has maintained his innocence and has refused to plead
guilty. In consideration of the very high conviction rate in Thailand’s
lèse-majesté trials, most defendants plead guilty in order to obtain a
significant reduction of their prison sentence and become eligible to apply for
a pardon from the palace.
 
We urge the Thai
government to end the persecution of Somyot and immediately set him free to
return to his wife and family. In addition, we call on the Thai government to
provide Somyot adequate compensation and effective remedy for the arbitrary
deprivation of his liberty.
 
Signed:
 
1.     Amnesty International
2.     Article 19
3.     ASEAN Parliamentarians for Human Rights
4.     Asian Forum for Human Rights and Development (FORUM-ASIA)
5.     Civil Rights Defenders
6.     Clean Clothes Campaign
7.     Committee to Protect Journalists
8.     FIDH - International Federation for Human Rights, within the
framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
9.     Fortify Rights
10.  Front Line Defenders
11.  Human Rights Watch
12.  International Commission of Jurists
13.  Lawyers’ Rights Watch Canada
14.  PEN International
15.  Reporters Sans Frontières / Reporters Without Borders
16.  World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of
the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders 