Philippines:  The Philippines: Ill-treatment in prison of Mrs. Luisa N. Encomio and her 10 month old baby
August  4, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2005 / AugustPhilippines: The Philippines: Ill-treatment in prison of Mrs. Luisa N. Encomio and her 10 month old babyCase PHL 260105.1 VAW Follow- up to PHL 260105. VAW Violence Against Women  Ill-treatment  Geneva, 4 August 2005  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the Philippines. New Information The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Asian Centre for the Progress of Peoples (ACPP), a member of the OMCT network, that the health of Ms. Luisa N. Encomio and her 10 month old baby is deteriorating due to the poor health facilities in Mambaurao Provincial Jail in Occidental Mindoror, Luzon. Furthermore, the court case against Ms. Encomio has not progressed. Brief description of the situation According to information received, Ms. Luisa N. Encomio was arrested without a warrant on May 6th 2004 for being an alleged New People’s Army (NPA) member and for her involvement in a failed attempt to ambush a convoy of police officers and soldiers in Brgy Quiriron, Calintaan, Occidental Mindoro in May 2000. At the time of her arrest, she was five months pregnant and gave birth on September 22nd 2004. According to the Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP), a member of the OMCT network , she was not granted access to medical facilities in order to have her pre and post-natal needs addressed. Her health has reportedly deteriorated since she was detained and her child has suffered from intermittent cold and fever. She was formally charged with attempted murder on May 13th 2004.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Luisa N. Encomio and her child and the lack of progression in her court case. Action requested Please write to the authorities in the Philippines urging them to: i. Take all necessary measures to guarantee their physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Luisa N. Encomio and her child and intervene with the proper authorities to ensure that adequate medical assistance is provided as a matter of urgency;  ii. order the immediate release of Ms Luisa N. Encomio in the absence of legal charges that are consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring her before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee her procedural rights at all times;  iii. Guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards. Addresses:  H.E. Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Republic of the Philippines, Malacañang Palace, J.P. Laurel St., San Miguel, Manila, Philippines Fax: (+632) 742 1641 / 929 3968 Email: corres@op.gov.ph / opnet@ops.gov.ph    Hon. Teresita Deles, Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process,7F Agustin Building I, Emerald Avenue,Pasig City, Philippines Fax: (+632) 638 2216    Hon. Avelino Cruz, Jr., Secretary, Department of National Defense, Camp Emilio, Aguinaldo, E. delos Santos Avenue, Quezon City, Philippines Fax: (+632) 911 6213    Hon. Purificacion Valera Quisumbing, Chairperson, Commission on Human Rights, SAAC Bldg., UP Complex, Commonwealth Avenue, Diliman, Quezon City, Philippines Fax: (+632) 929 0102 Email: drpvq@chr.gov.ph   Please also write to the embassies of the Philippines in your respective country.  Geneva, 4 August 2005  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 