Bahrain:  Ongoing arbitrary detention and judicial harassment against Mr. Abdulhadi Al Khawaja
June 28, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2011 / JuneBahrain: Ongoing arbitrary detention and judicial harassment against Mr. Abdulhadi Al Khawaja
URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
 
New information
BHR 004 / 0411 / OBS 070.2
Ongoing arbitrary detention / 
Torture and ill-treatment / Judicial harassment
Bahrain
June 28, 2011
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests 
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Bahrain.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources 
about the ongoing arbitrary detention and judicial harassment against Mr. 
Abdulhadi Al Khawaja, former MENA Director at Front Line and former President of the 
Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR), as well as about the alleged acts of 
torture and ill-treatment perpetrated against him.
 
According to the information received, on June 22, 2011, Mr. Al 
Khawaja was sentenced to life in prison for “organising and managing a terrorist 
organisation”, “attempt to overthrow the Government by force and in liaison with 
a terrorist organisation working for a foreign country” and the “collection of 
money for a terrorist group”, together with 20 other political and human rights 
activists by the National Security Court of Bahrain[1]. 
 
Following the reading of the verdict, Mr. Al Khawaja shouted that he 
“shall continue on the path of peaceful resistance” and was then beaten severely 
by court officers, mostly to his face that is still healing from other 
fractures. Later, Mr. Al Khawaja was allegedly brought to the 
Bahrain Defence Force (BDF) Hospital, as a result of these severe beatings. As of today, the family of Mr. 
Al Khawaja, who is detained in Gurain prison, has received no information 
regarding his current health condition.
 
After the reading of the verdict, Mr. Al Khawaja appealed against the 
decision. The appeal, initially scheduled at the beginning of July, will finally 
take place on June 29, 2011, seven days after the initial 
verdict.
 
The Observatory recalls that Mr. Abdulhadi Al Khawaja was brutally 
arrested on April 9, 2011, and witnesses present during his arrest declared that 
he was taken unconscious after having been violently beaten (See background 
information). 
 
The Observatory firmly denounces Mr. Al Khawaja’s ongoing arbitrary 
detention as well as the non respect of his right to defence by unduly 
accelerating the judicial proceedings against him, which seem to merely aim at 
sanctioning his human rights activities, and urges the Bahraini authorities to 
immediately and unconditionally release him. 
 
Background information:
 
On April 9, 2011, Mr. Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja, who has been organising 
peaceful awareness-raising and human rights education activities for protesters 
in the recent weeks, was arrested by masked policemen who forced entry to the 
building. Mr. Al-Khawaja was severely beaten up before being taken to an unknown 
destination. Moreover, Mr. Mohammad Al-Maskati, President of the Bahrain Youth 
Society for Human Rights (BYHRS), who has been monitoring human rights 
violations committed since the protest movement began, and who was also present 
in the house, was severely beaten during the raid but not arrested. 

 
On April 20, 2011, Mr. Abdulhadi Al Khawaja was allowed to make a 
one-minute phone call to his wife. He informed her that he was supposed to 
appear on April 21 at 8.00 am before the Military Court. Before this call, Mr. 
Al Khawaja’s daughter received a call from the military asking her to bring 
clothes for him. When his lawyers presented themselves before the Military 
Court, they were advised that the hearing will not take place on that date. They 
could not get any further information nor have access to their client. 

 
During his detention, Mr. Al Khawaja was reportedly tortured and 
sexually assaulted. In a letter dated of June 16, 2011, Mr. Al Khawaja reported 
on his health condition to explain that he had suffered severe beatings 
subsequent to his arrest. Mr. Al Khawaja had to undergo several surgeries as a 
result of his injuries, which notably caused four fractures in his cheek bone 
and jaw. While in detention, Mr. Al Khawaja still suffered from the injuries and 
was only allowed a limited number of visits by his doctor.
 
Actions requested:
 
The Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to: 
 
i.      Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological 
integrity of Mr. Al Khawaja, as well as of all human rights defenders in Bahrain;
 
ii.     Release Mr. Al Khawaja immediately and unconditionally, since his detention and subsequent 
sentencing seem to only aim at sanctioning his human rights activities; 

 
iii.     Carry out an immediate, thorough, independent and impartial 
investigation into the above-mentioned allegations of torture and ill-treatment, 
the result of which must be made public, in order to bring all those responsible 
before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil 
and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;
 
iv.    Put an end to any acts of harassment, including at the judicial 
level, against Mr. Al Khawaja as well as against all human rights defenders in 
Bahrain; 
v.   Conform in all circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration 
on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations 
General Assembly, in particular its Article 1, which states that “everyone has 
the right, individually or in association with others, to promote the protection 
and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and 
international levels”, and its Article 12.2 which provides that “the State shall 
take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent 
authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against 
any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, 
pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate 
exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”; 
 
vi.   Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental 
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and 
international instruments ratified by Bahrain. 
 
Addresses: 
 
·         
Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA , King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 
587
·         
Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tel: 
+973 172 27 555; Fax : +973 172 12 6032
·         
Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and Islamic 
Affairs, Tel: +973 175 31 333; Fax: +973 175 31 284 
·         
Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the United Nations in Geneva, 1 
chemin Jacques-Attenville, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, CP 39, 1292 Chambésy, 
Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch
 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of Bahrain in your 
respective countries. 
 
***
Paris-Geneva, June 28, 2011
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this 
appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the 
protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in 
their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org

Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 

Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 
29






[1] See FIDH-OMCT Joint Press Release, issued on June 22, 
2011. 