Syrian Arab Republic:  Syria: arrest of eight political opposition party members and activists
September 13, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2001 / SeptemberSyrian Arab Republic: Syria: arrest of eight political opposition party members and activistsCase SYR 130901  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Syrian Arab Republic.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Comités pour la défense des droits de l'Homme en Syrie (CDF), a member of the OMCT network, of the arrest of eight political opposition party members and activists in the Syrian Arab Republic.  According to the information received, eight political opposition activists have been arrested by the Syrian authorities since September 1st, 2001. They have reportedly been detained incommunicado since their arrest. They include:   ·	71-year old  Riad Turk, who is a lawyer and the first Secretary of the "Syrien-Bureau Politique" communist party, arrested on September 1st;  ·	54-year old Riad Seif, a parlementarian from Damas, arrested on September 6th;  ·	44-year old Kamal Labouani,  a doctor and member of the CDF's administrative council and the editorial committee of the "AMARJI" publication, arrested during the night of 8-9th September; ·	Aref Dalila, a Damas University professor and founding member of the "Commissions de la renaissance de la société civile" (CRSC) movement, arrested on September 9th; ·	52-year old Habib Saleh, a businessman from Tartarus and CRSC activist, arrested on September 9th; ·	Hassan Sa'Doun, from the Al-Hassaka region of norther Syria, and a debate forum activist, arrested on September 9th; ·	Walid Al-Bouni, a doctor and "dialogue nationale" forum organiser, arrested on September 9th; ·	Habib Issa, a lawyer and spokesperson for the”Jamal Attassi” forum, arrested during the night of 11-12th September; ·	Fawaz Tello, an engineer and member of the “dialogue nationale” forum,” arrested during the night of 11-12th September.  According to the information received, Mr. Riad Turk was arrested at a medical cabinet where he was receiving treatment following heart problems. He had reportedly previously spent 18 years in prison without having been tried. Dr. Walid Al-Bouni and Dr. Kamal Labouani were reportedly arrested at their respective houses, having attended a political seminar held in Mr. Riad Seif’s house on September 6th. Mr Habib Saleh was reportedly arrested in Tartus, having already been interrogated by the authorities earlier this year.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for these persons’ physical and psychological integrity, and fears that they may be subjected to ill-treatment or torture during their detention. OMCT is also gravely concerned about the Syrian authorities’ use of arbitrary arrests and incommunicado detentions in order repress and hinder the activities of opposition political parties and human rights organisations, such as the CDF in this case.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Syrian Arab Republic urging them to:  i.   take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned persons; ii.  order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iii. intervene with the appropriate authorities in order to secure that those detained be allowed to meet with their relatives and legal counsel; iv.  order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these arrets  in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; v.   put an immediate end to the persecution and harassment of the above-mentioned persons; vi.  guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	President Bashar al-Assad, Presidential Palace, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, Telegrams:President al-Assad, Damascus, Syria, Telexes: 419160 prespl sy  ·	Nabil al-Khatib, Ministry of Justice, Al-Nasr Street, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, Telegrams: Justice Minister, Damascus, Syria, Fax: + 963 11 224 6250  ·	Dr Muhammad Harba, Minister of the Interior, Ministry of the Interior, Merjeh Circle, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, Telegrams: Interior Minister, Damascus, Syria, Faxes: + 963 11 222 3428, Telexes:	411016 AFIRS SY  ·	Nasser Qaddur, State Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Al-Rashid Street, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, Fax: + 963 11 332 0686  Please also write to the embassies of Syrian Arab Republic in your respective country.  Geneva, Septembre 13, 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 