Colombia:  Colombia: Open Letter to President Uribe
April 14, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Urgent Interventions / Colombia / 2003 / AprilColombia: Colombia: Open Letter to President UribeOPEN LETTER TO ALVARO URIBE VELEZ PRESIDENT OF COLOMBIA   Geneva, April 8th 2003   Mr. President,  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by two members of its network, the Central Unitaria de Trabajadores (CUT) and the Corporacion Colectivo de Abogados ‘José Alvear Restrepo’, of the worrying situation faced by the Alto Ariari communities (municipalities of El Castillo and Lejanías, Meta Department) since May 2002.   A series of human rights violations, including torture, enforced disappearances, killings, arbitrary detentions, threats, burning and destruction of houses, as well as stealing of property and cattle, has led to the forced displacement of more than 80 percent of the Alto Ariari population, which is mostly made up of peasants. Approximately 300 families were forced to leave the region and found refuge in different parts of the country, most of them ending up in Villavicencio and Bogota, where they are living in total destitution with hardly any support from the authorities.   OMCT would like to bring your attention to the fact that the occurrence of the afore-mentioned violations, along with the subsequent forced displacement, are related to the launching, in May 2002, of operation “Conquista” by the National Army ‘s 21 Vargas battalion, with the participation of the Rapid Deployment Forces “Fudra” (Fuerzas de Despliegue Rápido) and the National Police.   This operation also reportedly allowed the ‘Autodefensas Unidas de Colombia’ (AUC) paramilitary group to operate in the region and to take part to the afore-mentioned human rights violations. Overall, the authorities’ answers to these violations have been to intimidate and threaten the victims’ relatives, while the military forces are not taking effective action to stop paramilitary advances or abuses.   A list of cases, sorted by date, is annexed to this letter and highlights an ongoing pattern of massive human rights violations that have occurred in the region since June 2002, and have mostly been conducted by the paramilitary and tolerated by the army. Accordingly, between June 2002 and mid-March 2003, 31 persons have been killed, 3 have disappeared and 3 have reportedly been tortured. In addition, among the 31 persons who have been killed, 7 of the bodies showed strong evidence of torture. It should be noted, that due to a climate of terror, this list remains a non-exhaustive one, given that many victims or their relatives are simply not complaining about the abuses they are facing out of fear of repression.   Regarding the situation of the population that remains in the area, OMCT is particularly concerned about the impact of the ongoing economic blockade enforced by the Colombian Army. While the stated objective of this measure is to suspend food supply for the guerrilla, it ends up in restricting the food supply for the whole civilian population that remains in the area, as well as in prohibiting the exit of products from the region. Both effects have a serious impact on the peasants’ revenue, as well as on their ability to get adequate food for themselves and their families.   In view of these considerations and of the list of cases attached to this letter, OMCT hopes that your Government will take immediate measures to ensure that the rights of the persons living in the municipalities of El Castillo and Lejanías are protected and upheld, including their right to be protected from torture, summary executions, enforced disappearances, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, as well as their economic, social and cultural rights.  OMCT also hopes that these measures will be accompanied by the provision of adequate compensation, reparation and rehabilitation to all the victims. Finally, OMCT urges your Government to take all appropriate steps in order to guarantee that an immediate investigation is launched into these violations in order to identify those responsible, bring them before a competent and impartial tribunal, and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law.  We thank you in advance for your careful consideration of this matter, and remain,   Yours Sincerely,    Eric Sottas Director   ---------------------------------------------------------------------  Non-exhaustive list of violations faced by the Alto Ariari communities (municipalities of El Castillo and Lejanias, Meta Department) since May 2002   First week of June 2002 (El Castillo Municipality): three unidentified cadavers are found on the banks of the Cumaral river with signs of torture and bullet wounds. Until today and according to the information received, no investigation has been carried out in order to determine their identity.   July 11th 2002 (El Castillo Municipality): around 100 members of the paramilitary wearing camouflage clothes and brassards with the AUC letters reach the surroundings of Caño Embarrado and of Medellín del Ariari garden and force the peasants to bring to the El Dorado Municipality around 1000 heads of livestock.   July 13th 2002 (El Castillo Municipality): the robbery of livestock stops but the paramilitary are still in El Jardín and Caño Embarrado, meanwhile the army remains in the area of Medellín del Ariari, 30 minutes walking distance from El Jardín and Caño Embarrado.   July 15th 2002 (El Castillo Municipality): the army shows itself in Medellín del Ariari with approximately 200 heads of livestock, which after being identified are given back to their owners.   August 1st 2002 (El Castillo Municipality): around 100 members of the paramilitary bring together the communities of El Jardín and la Macarena with a peace proposal. The army is located in Medellín del Ariari, a 30 minutes walking distance away.   August 9th 2002 (El Castillo Municipality): military planes are flying over the area and firing indiscriminately, while actions in the field by regular units and members of the paramilitary groups are taking place around the places where the peasants live. As a result, several persons are displaced and their homes, a school and the water and electric infrastructure are damaged.   August 26th 2002 (El Castillo Municipality): at 5:30 am, a military command of the 21st Vargas battalion led by Captain Wilson Lizarazo reaches Ms. Silvia Bernal’s house, firing on the way. The command reportedly takes Ms. Bernal’s three sons -Héctor, Eder and Evangelista Carvajal Bernal- to a mountain where they hit them and tells them that they are going to kill them because they belong to the guerrilla. At 11:00 am the command assassinates Eder Carvajal (around 16 years old), releases Héctor and takes Evangelista (well-known young farmer leader in the region) to the Villavicencio prison, where he is held during around 5 months.   August 26th 2002 (El Castillo Municipality): a military command group of the 21st Vargas battalion led by Captain Wilson Lizarazo reaches Ms. Blanca Maria Jaramillo’s house and arrests two farmers and head of families, Mr. Edilberto Rico Jaramillo Junior and Mr. Carlos Manuel Hoyos. Accused of rebellion, they are detained in the prison of Villavicencio until January 28th 2003.   August 27th 2002 (El Castillo Municipality): In a place known as la “Y”, between Puerto Uníon ands El Jardin, 30 minutes walking distance from Puerto Esperanza and Medellín del Ariari, peasants find 3 dead bodies whose identities are unknown. The bodies disappeared during a military operation.    August 27th 2002 (El Castillo Municipality): in the afternoon, while the 21st Vargas battalion was near Puerto Esperanza, the “Autodefensa Campesinos de Córdoba y Urabá” paramilitary, with badges on their camouflage clothes, enter the place known as la “Y” in 4-wheeled drive trucks and destroy several houses, along with personal belongings of the inhabitants. One of the paramilitary’s trucks has been seen on the previous day in the streets of Medellín del Ariari, where the army was posted.   Beginning of September (El Castillo Municipality): Lusardo Ramírez, living in Medellín del Ariari, was detained by paramilitary groups and has disappeared since that date.   September 3rd 2002 (Villavicencio): Oswaldo Moreno, a human rights defender who left the region several years ago, was assassinated in Villavicencio where he was working with displaced persons coming from El Castillo and Lejanas Municipalities.   September 14th 2002 (El Castillo Municipality): Jhon Gabriel Lizcano disappeared. His dead body, showing signs of torture, was found on September 20th 2002.   September 18th 2002 (Lejanías Municipality): Ms. Zoraida Nañez and her husband Mr. José Henao are assassinated by the paramilitary.   September 26th 2002 (El Castillo Municipality): Hernando Léon was taken by force from his residence, located in the surroundings of Caño Claro, by the paramilitary. Until today his whereabouts remain unknown.  In September 2002 (Lejanías Municipality): the dead body of an approximately 70-years old man was found. No investigation has been carried out in order to determine his identity.   October 18 2002 (El Castillo Municipality): 2 persons on a motorbike travelling from the Municipality of Lejanías kill Manuel N.N. in Miravalle with a short-range firearm in the presence of the inhabitants. These two persons entered and left the municipality of Lejanías via the bridge over the Guape River, where there is a permanent military checkpoint that controls the entry and exit of all the inhabitants, registering all persons.   November 1st 2002 (El Dorado Municipality): in the bus going from El Castillo to Villaviciencio, in Pueblo Sánchez (jurisdiction of the El Dorado Municipality), lawyer Mario Castro Bueno was taken out of the bus by the paramilitary to the Tres Esquinas, only 2 kilometres away from El Castillo, while going through Medellín del Ariari where the army 21st Vargas’ battalion has a permanent military checkpoint. Mario Castro Bueno was found dead with evident signs of torture, stab-wounds and cuts at this location.   November 14th 2002 (El Castillo Municipality): the livestock of the farmers in the surroundings of La Cima, El retiro and La Esmeralda was stolen by the paramilitary and taken to the surroundings of La Meseta (El Dorado Municipality), a location that served during several years as a camp for paramilitary groups.   December 15th 2002 (El Castillo Municipality): Mr. Libardo Gallego Echeverry, a farm labourer, was taken by the paramilitary in a 4-wheeled truck. He was wounded during his escape and found refuge in a house where a policeman killed him.   December 15th 2002 (El Castillo Municipality): three young men, Mr. Jose Estein Robayo, Mr. Didier Cárdenas and a nephew of Germán Palacios (a farmer of the municipality) are arrested and taken to the local commander of the police. They are visited by the Mayor of the Municipality Laura Gilma Moreno Urrea and by the Priest Carlos Ernesto Jaramillo, who is accompanied by eight members of the paramilitary. Priest Carlos Ernesto Jaramillo has reportedly beaten Jose Estein Robayo and told the eight paramilitary members that this young person was a member of the guerrilla and should therefore be assassinated. The three young men were allegedly tortured by policemen and members of the paramilitary.   December 20th 2002 (El Castillo Municipality): a young man, who was reportedly not in possession of identity documents, was taken out by the paramilitary to the surroundings of El Cable where his dead body was found two days later showing signs of torture. The young man was travelling from Bogotá to Vereda Caño Brasil where his mother Ofelia lives.   January 5th 2003 (El Castillo Municipality): 83-years old Adelaido Velasco, who was accused by the paramilitary of belonging to the guerrilla, was taken by them to the mountains. His body has not yet been found.   January 7th 2003 (El Castillo Municipality): at 2:30 pm, two members of the paramilitary remove Mr. Luis Eduardo Serna (25 years old) out of the bus and assassinate him in a place known as the Bodega, on the road that leads to the El Dorado Municipality. Luis Eduardo Serna had been threatened by the paramilitary who gave him 20 days to leave the region. At the time the paramilitary caught him he was leaving the region.   January 7th 2003 (El Castillo Municipality): three young men are assassinated in the surroundings of Cabaña of the El Castillo Municipality and their bodies are left in the Municipality’s park.   January 9th 2003 (El Castillo Municipality): at around 2:00 pm, two members of the paramilitary reach the surroundings of Caño Claro and assassinate farmer Mr. Luis Sánchez (42 years old): they throw him violently on stones and stab him in the heart and the posterior. During the same night unknown persons enter and search Mr. Luis Sánchez’s house without taking anything.   January 12th 2003 (El Castillo Municipality): in the afternoon, members of the paramilitary enter the farm of Mr. Héctor Pulido -located in the surroundings of Caño Claro-, tie him up and bring him to the mountains where they kill him with machetes and truncheons. Mr. Héctor Pulido was a recognised communal leader.   January 29th 2003 (El Castillo Municipality): Mr. Luis Miguel Gutiérrez – a peasant and communal leader- is assassinated by the paramilitary.  February 1st 2003 (El Castillo Municipality): Mr. Jesús Antonio Romero, a peasant, is taken from his house during the night by paramilitary forces. On the next day, his dead body was found.   First week of February 2003 (El Castillo Municipality): Mr. Rodrigo Gutiérrez, around 70 years old and living in the surroundings of  “la Cal” farm is taken from his house during the night by paramilitary forces. His body, which shows signs of torture, is found the next day in the surrounding of the “la Cal” farm.  February 8th 2003 (Lejanías Municipality): Mr. Bernabé Trujillo Rico is taken paramilitary to the Granada road in a red car, where is dead body is later found.  February 24th 2003 (El Castillo Municipality): Polidoro Rau Bustos is detained, tortured and assassinated by the paramilitary. His carved body is found nine days later.   March 1st 2003 (Lejanías Municipality): Mr. Pedro Bernal is assassinated by the paramilitary.  March 4th 2003 (El Castillo Municipality): Mr. Alfonso Cruz and Mr. Wilson Puertas are assassinated in the surroundings of Yucapé.  March 9th 2003 (Lejanías Municipality): Mr. Evangelista Hernández is assassinated in the surroundings of La Albania.   March 12th 2003 (Lejanías Municipality): Mr. Alirio Rondón is taken from his house and found dead some time later. 