Kazakhstan:  Important procedural violations during the first four hearings in the trial against Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayan
October 20, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kazakhstan / 2016 / OctoberKazakhstan: Important procedural violations during the first four hearings in the trial against Max Bokayev and Talgat AyanRUSSIAN VERSION_085.1 KAZ_001_1016_OBS 085.15 pages / 296 KB


URGENT APPEAL - THE
OBSERVATORY

 
New information
KAZ 001 / 1016/ OBS 085.1
Judicial harassment/
Arbitrary detention/deterioration of health
Kazakhstan
October 19, 2016
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a partnership of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and
FIDH, requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Kazakhstan. 
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the developments that occurred during the first, second, third and fourth
court hearings in the trial against Mr. Max
Bokayev[1],
head of the NGO “Arlan”[2]
and a human rights defender working for the protection of the environment,
freedom of expression and the fight against torture, and Mr. Talgat Ayan, a lawyer and activist from
Atyrau, Western Kazakhstan. Both human rights defenders played a crucial role
in organising peaceful protests that took place last April and early May 2016
against the amendments to the Land Code of Kazakhstan[3].
They are facing charges for “institution of social discord” (Article 174 of the
Criminal Code of Kazakhstan (CC), “dissemination
of knowingly false information” (Article 274 of the CC) and “violation of the procedure of organisation
and holding of meetings, rallies, pickets, street processions and
demonstrations” (Article 400 of the CC) and face imprisonment for a term
of up to ten years. The Observatory considers the charges to be trumped-up and
used as a tool to retaliate both activists for their legitimate civic
activities and human rights work. 
                
According to the information received, the first
hearing in the trial against Messrs. Bokayev and Ayan (see background
information) took place in Atyrau’s City Court No. 2 at 10.30 am on October 12,
2016, while the second took place on the following day, and the third and
fourth on October 17 and 18 respectively. During these first hearings,
important procedural violations were registered that amount to breaches of
internationally-recognised fair trial standards.
 
The court hearings were held in a rather small hall,
which could not contain the high number of activists and representatives of
civil society who intended to observe the hearing in view of the publicity of
the case. Those who were not able to be present in the Court room were
accommodated in a separate room to follow the hearing through a screen, but the
quality of both translation and microphones was not good, making it very
difficult for them to understand what was happening.
 
According to the information received, during the
first two hearings, most of the motions filed by the lawyers were dismissed by
the judge Gulnara Dauleshova.
Specifically, Mr. Ayan’s lawyer filed a motion to recuse the judge on the basis
that she had committed grave procedural violations, particularly regarding the
falsification of the date on which the judge had set the date and time for the
first hearing. 
 
In that motion, the defence lawyers demonstrated that
as the pre-trial detention of Messrs. Bokayev and Ayan came to an end on
September 30, 2016, they filed an application at around 10am on October 3, 2016
requesting that the case against their clients be dismissed (for
what a preliminary hearing needed to be carried out). 
 
The lawyers went on demonstrating that the electronic
Court system shows that the decision of the judge to set the date and time of
the first hearing was actually issued on October 3 at around 8pm, but that it
was subsequently changed to September 30, 2016, in an attempt to avoid dealing
with the application of the defence lawyers to dismiss the whole case. 
 
The defence lawyers concluded that this falsification
from the Court was undertaken with the sole objective of avoiding to release
the defendants from pre-trial detention. 
 
In their demonstration, the lawyers also stated that
even if the Court had actually scheduled the first hearing on September 30,
2016, it would have been humanly impossible for the judge and justice operators
within the Atyrau’s City Court to study the 72 volumes of hard-copy materials
related to the case, which were received in the Court only the day before, i.e.
on September 29. 
 
In spite of the demonstration and details provided by
the defence lawyers, the judge decided to dismiss their motion and arguments.
The recusation request was eventually rejected by the Court.
 
On October 13, the lawyers filed another motion to
obtain more information about the experts whose work was included in materials
brought by the prosecution, and on the methodology they had used to prepare
their findings. The lawyers noted in particular that they had crosschecked the
background of the experts of the Forensic Center of the Republic of Kazakhstan
whose names appeared in the above-mentioned materials, and had been informed
that one of the experts had been dismissed by the Center while the other had
never been a staff member of the Center. This motion was also dismissed by the
judge despite the arguments of the defence pointing out that this information
was essential in order to prepare the right questions during their interrogation.
 
During the same hearing, the lawyers request to change
the preventive measure of restraint against the accused, replacing pre-trial
detention with house arrest or bail, was likewise rejected by the Court. This
last motion was filed based on the health condition of Mr. Max Bokayev, who
suffers from hepatitis C, and whose health condition deteriorated in detention.
The judge dismissed the motion arguing that in the course of the previous
hearing, the defender had said he felt good. 
 
The subsequent hearings took place on October 17 and
18, 2016, and the court decided to proceed with the examination of the
witnesses, starting with those presented by the prosecutors followed by those
presented by the defendants. The witnesses presented by the prosecutors were
allowed to testify via videoconference from a Court in Astana, despite motions
filed by defence lawyers requesting that witnesses should be brought to Atyrau.
Both defendants, Messrs. Bokayev and Ayan, reported that due to the bad quality
of the sound, they could not hear well what the witnesses were stating, thus
affecting their right to defence.
 
On October 18, Mr. Bokayev requested a break during
the hearing, on the grounds that he was not feeling well, but the judge
dismissed his request arguing that he was “simulating a faintness”. 
 
The Observatory has however managed to confirm that
Messrs. Bokayev and Ayan had been brought back to the detention centre very
late on the day before the October-18 hearing, and that as they had arrived
after the dinnertime, they had not been served any food for dinner.
 
The Observatory expresses its concern regarding the
violations to fair trial standards reported throughout these four hearings,
which are evidence of the ongoing repression, intimidation, and judicial
harassment of human rights defenders in Kazakhstan, in an attempt to hinder
their legitimate human rights activities.
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the ongoing judicial
harassment politically-motivated trial against Messrs. Max Bokayev and Talgat
Ayan, and calls on the Kazakhstani authorities to respect due process and fair
trial standards, as well as to immediately and unconditionally release and drop
all charges against them.
 
The Observatory is also concerned about the
recognition of the politically-motivated character of this trial by Judge
Dauleshova herself, who issued a notice on October 10, 2016, urging the police
to provide her with protection within the framework of this "political
process" since it has caused “public outcry”.
 
The Observatory more generally condemns the ongoing
attempts by the Kazakhstani authorities to curtail the rights to freedom of
association, assembly, and expression in the country.
 
Background Information: 
 
Between April and May 2016, several protests were held
in Kazakhstan, gathering hundreds of citizens calling for the abolition of
amendments to the Land Code that were introduced in November 2015[4].
During this protests many were detained and sentenced to administrative
detention for “preparation of illegal rallies” or “hooliganism” or “inciting
social discord”. 
 
The Government launched a smear campaign via mass
media platforms accusing the protesters of planning violent attacks and blaming
a Kazakhstani businessman, for leading the protest movement in order to plot a
coup to destabilise the country. 
 
In
this context, the judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of Messrs.
Bokayev and Ayan has been ongoing since May 17, 2016, when they were arrested
in Atyrau in retaliation for their critical statements posted on Facebook and
for making public their intention to participate and encouraging others to take
part in the 21 May protests. On the same day, an administrative court sentenced
them to 15 days of administrative detention for “organising and holding
peaceful assemblies” (Article 488 of the Administrative Offences Code) in
violation of the laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan. This happened though the
two had sent requests for authorisation to hold demonstrations on May 21 to the
relevant local authorities in Atyrau, in accordance with domestic laws.
 
On May 20, 2016, the officers of the Division 9 of the
National Security Committee in Atyrau, following a court order, raided the
house of nine human rights defenders including that of Mr. Bokayev’s mother and
confiscated documents, computers,
telephones, USB sticks and other data storage elements. During the search, Mr.
Bokayev’s mother was injured and her front door was slammed in.
 
On
May 31, 2016, one day before the end date of their administrative detention, the National Security Committee issued an order charging Messrs.
Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayan with the offenses of “preparation of a crime”, and
“propaganda or public calls for seizure of power or
retention of power or violent change of the constitutional order” under Articles
24.1 and 179.3 of the criminal code. On July 21
these charges were replaced with the three charges mentioned above. 
 
On June 3, 2016, the investigation judge of
Atyrau Court No. 2 remanded Messrs. Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayan for two months
in pre-trial detention. Mr. Bokayev’s request for house arrest due to his
critical health condition given that Mr. Bokayev suffers from a chronic hepatitis C and
needs constant medical care was rejected. On August 27, 2016, the judge decided
to extend the pre-trial detention. The prosecutor argued that “Max Bokayev has
a lot of friends inside and outside of Kazakhstan and so there’s a fear that he
will leave the country”.
 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Kazakhstan asking
them to:
 
   
i.      
Immediately
and unconditionally drop all charges against Messrs. Bokayev and Ayan and put
an end to all acts of judicial harassment against them as well as against all
human rights defenders in Kazakhstan;
 
  
ii.      
Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Messrs.
Bokayev and Ayan, as well as of all human rights defenders in Kazakhstan;
 
 iii.      
Repeal legal provisions limiting freedom of peaceful
assembly beyond the narrow restrictions permitted under international human
rights law, particularly with the aim of ensuring that this right is no longer
subjected to the permission of government authorities and merely to prior
notification;
 
 
iv.      
Repeal legal provisions limiting freedom of
expression beyond the narrow restrictions permitted under Article 19 of the
ICCPR, including the vague and broad
definition of the offence of incitement to “social, national, clan, class or
religious discord” in Article 174 of the Criminal Code;
 
  
v.      
Comply
with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders;
 
 vi.      
Ensure in
all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Kazakhstan.
 Addresses:
·      
Mr.
Nursultan NAZARBAEV, President of the Republic of Kazakhstan. Fax: + 7 3172 32
61 82, 007 / 3172 / 32 40 89 
·      
Mr.
Kalmukhanbet Kassymov, Minister of Internal Affairs. Email: Kense@mvd.kz
·      
Mr.
Zhakip Assanov, Prosecutor General. Fax: +7 7172 506 402
·      
Mr. Askar
Shakirov, Human Rights Commissioner. Fax: +7 7172 74 05 48
·      
Ambassador
Ms. Zhanar Aitzhanova, Permanent Representative of the Republic of Kazakhstan
to the UN Office and other International organizations in Geneva. Fax: +41 (0)
22 788 66 02. Email: mission@kazakhstan-geneva.ch
·      
Ambassador Mr. Almaz KHAMZAYEV, Embassy of
Kazakhstan in Brussels. Email: brussels@mfa.kz.
·      
Permanent
Delegation of the Republic of Kazakstan to the OSCE in Vienna. Fax: +43 1 890
80 08 20. Email: kzosce@kazakhstan.at
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Kazakhstan in your
respective country.


***
 
Geneva-Paris, October 19, 2016
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective
of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression
against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the
European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international
civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
•  
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
•  
Tel and
fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
•  
Tel and
fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
 



[1]    Mr. Max Bokayev is a civil society activist. He
is a member of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) since
2011, a member of the “Zhanaozen-2011” International Committee under the
“Journalists in Trouble” Public Foundation, the initiator of the “Azat”
Coalition (freedoms and liberties on the Internet), and an active participant
in the National Preventive Mechanism (NPM) on the prevention of torture in
prisons. In 2016, he was appointed as head of the NPM regional group in Atyrau
oblast.


[2]     Arlan focuses on public scrutiny over
governmental actions and the right of citizens to participate in public life,
environmental protection especially in the context of oil companies, and
various social issues both at the local and national levels.


[3]     On May 12,
2016, Mr. Max Bokayev was invited by the Government to join a Land Code Reform
Commission that had been established to review the law following several
peaceful rallies across the country. However, he refused arguing that members
of the Commission should not be nominated by the government but by Kazakhstani
citizens and that the government should put an end to all acts of harassment
against those protesting the Land Code reform.


[4]     In November
2015, draft amendments to the Land Code, aiming at facilitating the lease of
agricultural land by foreigners were presented to the Parliament in Kazakhstan.
The amendments were adopted and should have entered into force in July 2016. Protesters
contended that the changes infringed upon the rights of Kazakhstani citizens
and landowners. 