Uruguay:  Report on the visits in the juvenile justice centres in Uruguay
May 20, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Reports and Publications / Uruguay / 2011 / MayUruguay: Report on the visits in the juvenile justice centres in UruguayGeneva-Montevideo, May 2011. The World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and its local partner in Uruguay, the Institute for Legal and Social
Studies (IELSUR), publish their report on the situation of children deprived of
liberty in Uruguay. It focuses on the various forms of
violence perpetrated against those children while in police custody and pre-
and post-trial detention and shows that the treatment of children deprived of
liberty often amounts to inhuman and degrading treatment.

The report
provides a thorough analysis of the situation of children deprived of liberty
in Benin.
Through monitoring visits, the OMCT and its local partner IELSUR (member of the
OMCT SOS/Torture network member since 1985), together with other local NGO
partners from the Committee on the Rights of the Child in Uruguay,
have observed that the conditions in some juvenile detention centres may amount
to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. Such findings reflect those made by
the Special Rapporteur on torture, Manfred Novak, during his mission to Uruguay
in 2009.[1]
In particular, several of the pre- and post-trial facilities are run down,
extremely dirty, and inappropriate for children’s and adolescents’ needs. In
some centres, adolescents are kept in their cells for more than 20 hours a day
with no possibility of educational or leisure activities. Despite recent
improvements, the administration of drugs (soporifics) continues to be used as
a means of controlling child detainees.
The report
contains a series of detailed recommendations addressed to the authorities and
other relevant stakeholders. It aims to encourage action in order to enhance
the protection of child detainees from violations of their human rights, in
particular torture and ill-treatment.
Link report: OMCT-Comité de los derechos del Niño Uruguay_Informe sobre las visitas en los centros de reclusion del INAU_final 


[1]
Report of the Special Rapporteur on torture, Mission to
Uruguay,
UN Doc A/HRC/13/39/Add.2, 2009. 