Russian Federation:  Five years later, human rights defender Natalia Estemirova’s murderers still at large
July 14, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2014 / JulyRussian Federation: Five years later, human rights defender Natalia Estemirova’s murderers still at largeGeneva-Paris, July 14, 2014. On the
fifth anniversary of the murder of prominent human rights defender Ms. Natalia
Estemirova, the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), within
the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders,
condemn the intolerable impunity that persists and reiterate their call for a
thorough, impartial and independent investigation into her assassination.
 
On July 15,
2009, Ms. Natalia Estemirova, leading researcher in
Grozny's office of the Human Rights Centre “Memorial”, was
kidnapped at around 8.30 am close to her
home in Grozny, Chechnya. She was later found shot dead at 5.20 pm in a forest
close to Nazran in Ingushetya. Five years later, the investigation has not yielded any visible results and her
killers remain at large.
 
“Five years after the brutal death of
Natalia Estemirova, we remain saddened by the loss of such a leading human rights activist in Russia. Sadly, her
case also reminds us that many other human rights
defenders in Russia continue to face multiple obstacles because of their courageous fight against human rights violations and impunity”, OMCT Secretary General Gerald
Staberock said today.
 
Ms. Estemirova had worked at the Human Rights Centre Memorial in Grozny
since 2000. She had received many awards for her human rights work, and was among those who have denounced human rights violations committed in
Chechnya during the two wars. The Pro-Russian Chechen authorities had
repeatedly expressed their discontent with her work.
 
The
Observatory also recalls that the Chairman of the Executive Committee of the
Human Rights Centre “Memorial”, Mr. Oleg
Orlov, was sued by Mr. Ramzan Kadyrov, President of the Republic of
Chechnya, from August 2009 to January 20, 2012. The actions brought against Mr.
Orlov by Mr. Kadyrov for defamation, first at the civil level, then at the
criminal level, were manifestly undertaken in an attempt to sanction a
statement made by Mr. Orlov about Mr. Kadyrov’s responsibility in the
assassination of Ms. Natalia Estemirova in August 2009.
 
“We
regret the inability of the Russian judiciary
to determine the overall responsibilities and shed light on this murder, in
violation of international obligations of the Russian Federation. It is urgent that an end be finally put to this intolerable impunity that encourages further acts of harassment
against human rights defenders in the
country", said FIDH
President Karim Lahidji.
 
The
Observatory calls on the Russian authorities to abide by the recommendations
formulated by the United Nations (UN)
Committee Against Torture (CAT) in its Concluding Observations on the fifth
periodic report of the Russian Federation in November 2012, including
to “investigate promptly, thoroughly and impartially all allegations of
intimidation, threats, attacks and killings of human rights defenders and bring
to justice those responsible for ordering the killing of […] Ms. Natalia
Estemirova […]”.
 
More
generally, the Observatory calls on the
Russian authorities to guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of
all human rights defenders in the Russian Federation, in
line with the UN
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders. 