India:  New allegations of ill-treatment by Border Security Force (BSF) soldiers in West Bengal
August 31, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / India / 2012 / AugustIndia: New allegations of ill-treatment by Border Security Force (BSF) soldiers in West Bengal 
Case IND 310812
Allegations of ill-treatment/ No proper investigation/ Risk of impunity
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requestsyour URGENT intervention in the following situation in India/
West Bengal.
Brief
description of the situation
The
International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by Banglar Manabadhikar Suraksha Mancha (MASUM), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture
Network, about two cases of alleged ill-treatment by Border Security Force
(BSF) soldiers in West Bengal, namely the cases of Mr Ajibor Gaji, aged
about 26 years old from Amudia Village, in North 24 Parganas district, and Mr Majim Sardar, aged about 46 years old
from Char Sahebnagar village, in Murshidabad district.
According to the information received, on 21 July 2012 at about 11:00 pm,
Mr Ajibor Gaji, a daily wager earner, was returning home with his cows by
crossing the ground of Amodia Primary School, near Amodia Gate no. 1, when eight
BSF soldiers from Amodia BSF Out-Post, Battalion no. 152, detained him. One of
the BSF soldiers, about 30 years old, started to beat Mr Ajibor Gaji with a
stick on his face, forehead and ears and then on his back, legs and chest with
a riffle but. Other five soldiers also started to beat him with sticks and
riffles all over his body. It is reported that a BSF officer from the
intelligence unit witnessed the beating from a short distance but did not
intervene. Mr Ajibor Gaji was then taken to Amodia Camp in a BSF van. He was
only released when neighbours came to the camp and paid the aforementioned BSF
intelligence officer some money. He was then brought to a local doctor for a
medical examination and treatment. Mr Ajibor Gaji reportedly suffered swellings
and bruising on different parts of his body. 
Mr Ajibor Gaji lodged on 26 July 2012 a written complaint to the Sub
Division Police Office, Basirhat, North 24 Parganas, to denounce the
aforementioned events. To date, there has been reportedly no investigation
carried out into the aforementioned events. 
According to the same information received, on 23 June 2012 in the
evening, Mr Majim Sardar, a farmer, was returning home from Seikhpara when
about eight BSF soldiers from Kaharpara BSF Out-Post, Battalion no. 92,
detained him on the Kaharpara Iron Bridge without giving any reason. The BSF
soldiers allegedly started to kick Mr Majim Sardar until he almost lost his
senses. He was taken to Raninagar Police Station but the on-duty police officer
reportedly refused to take him in custody. The BSF soldiers then took him to
Kaharpara BSF Camp where he was detained for three days without charges and
without access to a lawyer and his family in violation of the Indian Criminal
Procedure Code. He was allegedly deprived of sleep and was not provided medical
care. On 26 June 2012, Mr Majim Sardar was transferred to Raninagar Police
Station, where the BSF soldiers lodged a complaint against him for “disobedience
to an order lawfully promulgated by a public servant” (case no. 350/2012 under
section 188 of Indian Penal Code). He was then taken to Godhanpara Primary
Health Centre for a medical check up before being presented at Labagh Court. He
reportedly suffered from hematoma and bruising on his chest and back. He was
later released on bail.
Mr Majim Sardar lodged a written complaint on 4 July 2012 before the
Superintendent of Police, Murshidabad against the BSF soldiers. To date, there
has been reportedly no investigation carried out into the aforementioned
events. 
The International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its
deep concern about the safety and physical and psychological integrity of Mr Ajibor Gaji and Mr Majim Sardar. OMCT
urges the competent authorities to guarantee their physical and psychological
integrity at all times, notably by immediately putting in place adequate
protection measures for them, and by suspending the BSF soldiers believed to be
responsible for the allegations of ill-treatment, pending an investigation. 
OMCT recalls that the authorities have to fulfil their
obligations under
the Indian Constitution and under international human rights law to
protect the right not to be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment, to consider seriously any allegations of
ill-treatment, and to undertake a prompt,
effective, thorough, independent and
impartial investigation in this
regard, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and
apply adequate sanctions. OMCT also recalls that victims must be ensured the
right to an effective remedy for the human rights violations suffered as well
as the right to full redress, including compensation and rehabilitation. 
OMCT
has documented many cases of indiscriminate killings, torture and ill-treatment
committed by the BSF over the years in West Bengal, against both Indian and
Bangladeshi nationals, in an alleged effort to contain illegal cross-border
activities. Although in some cases complaints were lodged, no effective
investigations have been carried out and no perpetrators were brought to
justice.
Action requested
Please write to the authorities in India
urging them to:

Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological
integrity of Mr Ajibor Gaji and Mr Majim Sardar; 
Immediately
put in place adequate protection measures for them;
Carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial
investigation into the alleged acts of ill-treatment suffered by Mr Ajibor Gaji and Mr Majim Sardar and their
brief arbitrary detention, the
result of which must be made public, in order to bring those responsible
before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal,
civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;
Ensure that adequate, effective and prompt reparation including
adequate compensation and rehabilitation is granted to Mr Ajibor Gaji and Mr Majim Sardar;
Guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms
throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international
human rights standards

Addresses
Ø Mr. Shri Manmohan Singh, Prime Minister of India, Prime Minister’s Office, Room number 152, South Block, New Delhi, Fax:
+ 91 11 2301 6857;
Ø Union Minister
of Home Affairs, Ministry of Home
Affairs, 104-107 North Block, New Delhi 110 001 India, Fax: +91 11 2309 2979; 
Ø Chief Justice of India,
Supreme Court, Tilak Marg, New Delhi
-1, Fax: +91 11 233 83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.in;  
Ø Justice K. G. Balakrishnan, Chairperson, National Human Rights Commission of India, Faridkot House,
Copernicus Marg, New Delhi 110 001, Fax: +91 11 2334 0016, Email: chairnhrc@nic.in; 
Ø Mr. Satyabrata Pal, Member, National
Human Rights Commission of India, Faridkot House, Copernicus Marg, New
Delhi 110 001, Fax: +91 11 2334 0016, Email: satyabrata49@hotmail.com;
Ø Acting Chairman, West Bengal Human Rights
Commission, Bhabani Bhaban, Alipur, Kolkata -27. Fax +91 33 24799633, Email: wbhrc@cal3.vsnl.net.in; 
Ø M. K. Narayanan, Governor, West Bengal, Raj Bhaban, Kolkata –
62, Phone:
+91 33-2200 1641, Fax: +91 33 – 2200 2444 / 2200 1649, secy-gov-wb@nic.in;

Ø Miss Mamata Banerjee, Chief
Minister, Government of West Bengal, Writers’ Buildings, BBD Bagh, Kolkata
– 1, Fax - +91 33 22145480, Email - cm@wb.gov.in, sechome@wb.gov.in; 
Ø Permanent Mission of
India to the United Nations (Geneva),Rue du Valais
9, 1202 Geneva, Tel: +41 22 906 86 86, Fax:
+41 22 906 86 96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy
of India in your respective country.
Geneva, 31 August 2012
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply. 