26 June 2012: Victims' rights must be centre stage in global fight against torture
June 26, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionAssistance to victims  / Urgent Interventions / 2012 / June26 June 2012: Victims' rights must be centre stage in global fight against torturePress Release_June 261 page / 50 KB​WORLD ORGANISATION AGAINS TORTURE (OMCT)PRESS RELEASE
International
Day in Support of Victims of Torture
Victims’
rights must be centre stage in global fight against torture
Geneva, 26th of June 2012. On the occasion of the International Day
in Support of Victims of Torture, the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), the leading global civil
society coalition against torture, calls on States and the international
community to increase its efforts to protect victims of torture and to end
impunity for acts of torture.
‘The UN Day for the Victims of Torture should remind
us all that the protection of victims and their rights must be centre stage of
the global anti-torture efforts’, said Gerald
Staberock, OMCT Secretary General. 
In a special video message launched today (see below), members of the OMCT General Assembly, representing its
global network against torture, highlight the importance of June 26 globally
and the need to act resolutely to protect victims of torture. 
‘Much more needs to be done to ensure that victims
are protected, that remedies are made to work in practice, that investigations
into torture are conducted with independence and that those responsible are
effectively brought to justice. This is fundamental for victims to re-establish
their lives. And without justice for victims of torture will not be prevented
in the future’, he added.
Victims of torture have rights under international
law and States have clear obligations to provide remedies and reparation to
victims, including rehabilitation and compensation. Yet the OMCT observes daily
that remedies fail in practice and that reparations are rarely provided to
victims of torture. Multiple legal and practical impediments continue to
prevent independent investigations into the crime of torture. Impunity remains
the rule in many parts of the world. 
On the occasion of the UN Day for the Victims of
Torture the OMCT is conducting a number of special events that will be
published on a specially designated website as part of its global campaign for the Absolute Prohibition
of Torture and Ill-treatment, notably through the Manifesto entitled “Nothing can justify torture under any circumstances”,
which has already been signed by more than 4,000
signatories, including ten laureates of the Nobel Prize. 
‘Indeed June 26 should not only serve to remind States of their
obligations to respect and guarantee the absolute prohibition of torture and
ill-treatment, but that the fight against torture can only be effective if the public
in our societies rejects and denounces such barbaric practices and demands from
their governments effective steps to protect victims of torture’, said the
OMCT. 
For further information, please contact: 
Pierre-Henri Golly, +41 22 809 49 39For further
information on OMCT’s Campaign and June 26:
www.omct.org/assistance-to-victims/events/2012/06/d21843/
To
watch the video, click on http://vimeo.com/44444662 