Ethiopia:  A decision by the Federal High Court undermines the survival of prominent national human rights organisation
November  3, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Ethiopia / 2011 / NovemberEthiopia: A decision by the Federal High Court undermines the survival of prominent national human rights organisationImpact of the CSO Proclamation on HRCO18 pages / 756 KB

PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY
 
ETHIOPIA : A decision by the Federal High Court undermines the 
survival of prominent national human rights organisation
 
Paris-Geneva, November 3, 2011. The Observatory for the Protection 
of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for 
Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), deplores 
the decision of the Federal High Court to uphold the freeze since 2009 by the Charities and Societies 
Agency (ChSA) of all assets of the Human Rights Council (HRCO) - formally known 
as the Ethiopian Human Rights Council (EHRCO) - and calls on the Ethiopian 
Supreme Court to urgently review this decision in conformity with international 
standards on the right to freedom of association.
 
On October 24, 2011, the Federal High Court sustained the decision of 
the ChSA to freeze HRCO’s assets. The HCRO has decided to appeal this decision 
before the Ethiopian Supreme Court.
 
In 2009, the Ethiopian authorities adopted the Charities and 
Societies Proclamation 621/2009 (CSO Proclamation), which blatantly restricted 
the right to freedom of association of civil society organisations. The 
Observatory deplored its adoption, which was governed by the sole objective to 
silence criticism by NGOs on the authorities' governance and human rights 
record.
 
Indeed, the CSO Proclamation prohibits national human rights 
organisations from receiving more than 10 percent of their funding from foreign 
sources. Given that national funds are either scarce or hardly accessible, human 
rights NGOs are largely dependent upon foreign donor assistance. Therefore these 
provisions clearly aim at weakening if not dissolving independent human rights 
organisations. Moreover, many of the CSO Proclamation provisions grant the ChSA 
excessive and wide-ranging discretionary powers to intrude into civil society 
organisations (CSO) internal affairs. Article 85 of the CSO Proclamation 
empowers the ChSA to enter the premises of any CSO in the absence of a 
court-ordered warrant, search the property, take away original documents and 
interrogate employees. Article 69 of the CSO Proclamation also states that the 
ChSA may deny registration to a CSO “where the nomenclature of the Charity or 
Society is country wide and the composition of its members or place of business 
do not show the representation of at least five regional 
states”.
 
Such provisions led many Ethiopian CSOs to give up their human 
rights-based operations and programmes. Others, like HRCO, which resolved not to 
rescind its human rights activities, had to forgo their foreign funding and to 
significantly reduce its staff by 80 percent and consequently its human rights 
operations and programmes.
 
Adopted in late 2009, the CSO Proclamation provided for an interim 
period of one year during which a CSO could make amendments necessary to conform 
to the new legal framework. However, the ChSA, by a letter written in December 
2009, ordered four private banks to freeze all of HRCO’s assets including its 
private bank accounts and sustainability fund. As the ChSA did not secure a 
court-ordered warrant permitting it to freeze HRCO’s assets nor does the CSO 
Proclamation give the ChSA the authority to block HRCO’s bank accounts, HRCO 
decided to challenge the lawfulness of the freeze before the Federal High 
Court.
 
Therefore, the Observatory urges:
 
· the Supreme Court to conform its ruling on international human 
rights standards pertaining to freedom of association binding Ethiopia, such as 
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the African Charter 
on Human and Peoples' Rights;
 
· the international community to denounce the CSO Proclamation as 
being contrary to international human rights standards and to call the Ethiopian 
Government to revoke or amend the Proclamation in that regard;
 
· the Ethiopian Government to repeal or amend the CSO Proclamation in 
conformity with international human rights conventions and the Ethiopian 
Constitution;
 
· the 
Ethiopian Government to comply with the provisions of the 1998 UN Declaration on 
the Human Rights Defenders and to ensure in all circumstances the respect for 
human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international and 
regional human rights instruments ratified by Ethiopia.
 
For more information on the impact of the CSO Proclamation, please 
consult HRCO's website:
http://www.ehrco.org/index.php?view=article&catid=11%3Aspecial-report&id=128%3Athe-impact-of-the-cso-proclamation-on-the-human-rights-council-july-2011&option=com_content&Itemid=5&lang=en
 
For further information, please contact:
· FIDH: Karine Appy / Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 
18
· OMCT: Delphine Reculeau : + 41 22 809 49 39 