Egypt:  Egypt: Two men shot by a police officer
October 20, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2005 / OctoberEgypt: Egypt: Two men shot by a police officerCase EGY 201005Shooting  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Egypt.  Brief Description of the SituationThe International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Egyptian Organisation for Human Rights (EOHR), a member of the OMCT network, of the shooting of Alaa Mahmoud Abdel Lateef, a bus driver, and Mohamed Adly.  According to the information received, on 7th October 2005, a police officer from Atlas police station demanded that Alaa Mahmoud Abdel Lateef make the passengers on his bus get off and that he drive him to the Atlas area. Alaa Mahmoud Abdel Lateef refused and the police officer reportedly shot him and his friend in the neck. Alaa Mahmoud Abdel Lateef went into a coma and Mohamed Adly’s spinal cord was brken and he was paralysed. Both were transferred to Helwan public hospital, which refused to receive the two men and so they were transferred to El-Manial El-Gameay hospital and transferred to intensive care.  An investigation was reportedly held and the police officer was imprisoned for four days (Trial no. 10166).   Action requestedPlease write to the authorities in Egypt urging them to: i.  	Ensure the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Alaa Mahmoud Abdel Lateef and Mohamed Adly; ii.	Order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of the shooting of Alaa Mahmoud Abdel Lateef and Mohamed Adly, bring the perpetrator to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; ii.   Guarantee that adequate medical care and reparation is provided to the victims; iii.  Guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  AddressesPresident of the Arab Republic of Egypt, His Excellency Mohammad Hosni Mubarak, Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: webmaster@presidency.gov.eg, Fax:+202 390 1998  Minister of the Interior, His Excellency General Habib al-Adeli, Ministry of the Interior, Al-Sheikh Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: moi@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 579 2031  Minister of Justice, His Excellency Mr Mahmoud Abu El Lial Rashed, Ministry of Justice, Midan Lazoghly, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 795 8103   Public Prosecutor, Counsellor Maher 'Abd al-Wahid, Dar al-Qadha al-'Ali, Ramses Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 577 4716  Ambassadeur Gabr, Naéla, Av. Blanc 49 (2ème), CH-1202, Genève, Suisse, e-mail: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, fax: +4122 738 44 15  Please also write to the embassies of Egypt in your respective country.  Geneva, October 20 2005.  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 