Nepal:  Allegations of torture of a minor boy, A.D.F. (name withheld), in Banke district
March 21, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2013 / MarchNepal: Allegations of torture of a minor boy, A.D.F. (name withheld), in Banke district
NPL 210313
CHILD CONCERN
Allegation of torture and
ill-treatment/ Risk of impunity/ Risk of Police reprisals
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Nepal. 
Brief description of the situation
TheInternational
Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by Advocacy Forum, a member of OMCT
SOS-Torture Network, about the allegations of torture of a minor boy, A.D.F.
(name withheld), 15 years
old, in Basdevpur, Futaha, Banke district. OMCT fears for the safety of A.D.F. 
According to the information received, on 19 February
2013 at around 3 am, about nine policemen forcefully opened the door and
entered in A.D.F.’s house and arrested him. A.D.F. was put in a police van and was
taken to District Police Office (DPO), Banke. In the police van on the way to
DPO, Banke, one unidentified policeman from Tharu community kicked A.D.F. on his
back with police boots and beat him with a bamboo stick on his shoulders. While
kicking and beating him the police asked him if he was involved in the robbery
case of Surkhet road. A.D.F. informed that he did not know anything about that
case.
A.D.F. was detained in a detention cell at DPO, Banke
where he met some other boys whom he knew already. He came to know they had
given his name to the police. A.D.F. was also detained with adults at the DPO. On
20 February 2013 his case was made public through a press conference.
According to the same information received, at around
noon on 19 February 2013 a policeman named “David” handcuffed A.D.F. and took him
to Ward Police Office, Fultekra, Nepalgunj, Banke where he was blindfolded with
a piece of cloth and taken to a room. While being blindfolded, A.D.F. could see
that “David” had a stick on his hand and later A.D.F. heard other three or four
voices also in the room. They forced him to kneel and “David” beat hard on his
legs with the stick. While beating, the policeman reportedly asked him about
Surkhet road’s robbery case and from where he had got a pistol. When A.D.F.
pleaded his innocence and explained that he did not have a pistol, he was again
beaten with a stick and kicked with police boots. A.D.F. was tortured for about
half an hour. When the pain got severe A.D.F. reportedly accepted all
allegations against him. 
At around 5 pm on the same day, A.D.F. was transferred
back to DPO, Banke. The same evening two unidentified policemen took him to the
top of DPO, Banke, where about five other unidentified policemen were sitting
on chairs. They handcuffed A.D.F. and forced him to lie down on the floor. Subsequently,
two policemen beat on the soles of A.D.F.’s feet with bicycle pump's pipe for
about twenty-five to thirty times. They also asked A.D.F. the same questions related
to the robbery case. They kicked him with police boots on various parts of his
body, punched and slapped on his chest and cheeks asking him the questions.
They tortured A.D.F. there for about half an hour and then A.D.F. was detained
in a detention cell.
A.D.F. was taken to a hospital for a medical checkup
but the doctor did not ask him whether he had been tortured.
On 20 February 2013, at around midnight, the policeman
“David” brought A.D.F. out from the detention cell, caught on his breasts and
pulled him up. Due to the severe pain, A.D.F. cried. The policeman jumped and
kicked on A.D.F.’s stomach with police boots for three times and kicked a round
kick on his waist once. The policeman reportedly said, "now your legs
won't cure for one year. If you share the information of torture with others
and I lose my job, I will not leave you at any cost." 
Only two days after A.D.F.’s detention, on 21 February
2013, he was brought before the court and he was given an arrest warrant. On
the same day, he was remanded, for the first time, for seven days; on 28
February 2013, for the second time, for ten days; and on 09 March 2013, for the
third time, for ten days. As no weapon (arms and ammunition) was found with
him, he was charged of drug abuse. At the time of issuing this urgent appeal, A.D.F.
was detained at DPO, Banke. He was under threat of further torture.
OMCT is gravely concerned for the safety
of A.D.F. and urges the relevant
authorities to take all necessary measures to guarantee his physical and
psychological integrity, at all times, in accordance with international law, in
particular the UN Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the Convention on the Rights of the Child. 
OMCT recalls that the arrest and
detention of juveniles should “be used only as a measure of last resort and for the
shortest appropriate period of time” (article 37-b of the UN Convention on the
Rights of the Child). OMCT also recalls, that "every child deprived of
liberty shall be treated with humanity and respect for the inherent dignity of
the human person, and in a manner which takes into account the needs of persons
of his or her age" (article 37-c of the UN Convention on the Rights of the
Child). 
Actions Requested 
Please write to the
authorities in Nepal urging them to:
i.              
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of A.D.F., his family members and the lawyers working on the
case; 
ii.             
Immediately put in place adequate protection measures for A.D.F.; 
iii.           
Order his immediate release in the absence of
valid legal charges that are consistent with international law and standards,
or, if such charges exist, bring him promptly before an impartial, independent
and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times;
iv.           
Guarantee
to him the respect of his rights in accordance with international juvenile
justice law and standards; 
v.             
Guarantee
that he is kept separately from adults detainees; 
vi.           
Carry out a prompt, effective,
thorough, independent and impartial investigation into these events, notably the allegations
of torture and other ill-treatment, the result of which must be made public,
in orderto bring those responsible
before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil
and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;
vii.          
Guarantee that no evidence obtained under torture
and other forms of ill-treatment, or threats thereof, be used in court
proceedings against him as stipulated in Article 15 of the UN Convention
Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
viii.        
Ensure that adequate, effective and prompt
reparation, including adequate compensation and rehabilitation, is granted to
the victim concerned;
ix.           
Guarantee
the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country
in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards,
notably the UN Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Addresses
Ø Prime
Minister, Dr. Baburam Bhattarai, Office of the Prime Minister and Council of
Nepal, Singha Darbar, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: + 977-1-4211286, Email: info@opmcm.gov.np 
Ø Inspector
General of Police, Mr. Kuber Singh Rana, Police Head Quarters, Naxal,
Kathmandu, Nepal, PO. Box No.: 407, Fax: + 977 1 4 415 593, Email: info@nepalpolice.gov.np
Ø Attorney
General, Mr. Mukti Nath Pradhan, Office of Attorney General Ramshahpath,
Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: + 977 1 4262582, Email: attorney@mos.com.np,    info@attorneygeneral.gov.np , socialjus@gmail.com 
Ø Chairman of
the National Human Rights Commission, Mr. Kedar Nath Uppadhya, Pulchowck,
Lalitpur, Nepal; Email: nhrc@nhrcnepal.org ; 
complaints@nhrcnepal.org  Fax: + 977 1 5547973
Ø Permanent Mission of Nepal, 81 rue de la
Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland,
Fax: + 4122 7332722, E-mail: mission.nepal@bluewin.ch

Please also write to the embassies of Nepal in your
respective country.
***
Geneva, 21 March 2013
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 