Congo, Democratic Republic:  'D.R. Congo
November  2, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Congo, Democratic Republic / 2001 / NovemberCongo, Democratic Republic: 'D.R. CongoURGENT APPEAL - OBSERVATORY  Original : French  RDC 005 / 0006 / OBS 052 Arrest  Democratic Republic of Congo (Goma) 14th June 2000  The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the FIDH and the OMCT, request your URGENT intervention on the following situation in Goma, Democratic Republic of Congo (zone under the control of the Congolese Rally for Democracy).  Brief description:  The Observatory was informed by Agir Ensemble Pour les Droits de l’Homme, of the arrest of Mr. Valentin Baelongandi, who is a member of Groupe Lotus, an organization based in Kisangani (in the Province Orientale) and member of the FIDH.  According to the information received, Mr. Baelongandi was arrested at the airport in Goma on 1 June 2000 by the security services of the Congolese Rally for Democracy in Goma (RCD), as he was preparing to return to Kigali in his professional capacity.    Mr. Baelongandi was carrying computer diskettes with a report by GROUPE LOTUS, which was written specifically for informing western NGOs on the recent events that have occurred in Kisangani.  The security forces confiscated the diskettes and sent the report to the RCD authorities.    Mr. Baelongandi has been detained in solitary prison since 1 June 2000 at the Department of Security and Intelligence in the center of Goma, which has a bad reputation.    Furthermore, according to the information received, the military forces took the $850 that Mr. Baelongandi was carrying with him at the time of arrest.    The Observatory expresses its grave concern about the arrest of Mr. Baelongandi and the risk of torture he faces,  along with the current situation in Goma, in the Democratic Republic of Congo.  Action Requested  Please write to the authorities of the Congolese Rally for Democracy (RCD) urging that they   i.	i.	to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the Mr. Valentin Baelongandi, order his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times;  ii.	put an end to the persecution, arrests, and all the other forms of harassment against human rights defenders, within the territory;  iii.	ensure the implementation of the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9 1998 (Declaration concerning the rights and responsibilities of individuals, groups and institutions to promote and protect universally recognised human rights and fundamental liberties) in particular its Article 1 which provides that " Every person has the right, individually or collectively, to promote the protection and fulfilment of human rights and fundamental liberties at the national and international level. ", and also its article 5, which provides that « everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, at the national and international levels : (a) to meet or assemble peacefully ; (b) to form, join and participate in non-governmental organizations, associations or groups ; (c) to communicate with non-governmental or intergovernmental organizations. »  iv.	more generally guarantee the effective respect of fundamental human rights and freedoms in accordance with the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.  Addresses   Rassemblement Congolais pour la Démocratie / Goma par fax 00 871 761 850 629.   Geneva- Paris, 14th June 2000  Kindly inform the Observatory of any action undertaken quoting the code number of the present appeal.  The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.1998 Human Rights Prize of The French Republic  To contact the Observatory, call the Emergency line :Fax :  33 (0) 1 55 80 83 92 Tel 	FIDH 33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11	OMCT + 4122 809 49 39  E.Mail : observatoire@iprolink.ch 