CALL FOR INPUT ON CHALLENGES & NEEDS FACED BY WOMEN HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS IN AFRICA
November 29, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Events / 2012 / NovemberCALL FOR INPUT ON CHALLENGES & NEEDS FACED BY WOMEN HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS IN AFRICA

CALL FOR INPUT ON CHALLENGES & NEEDS FACED BY
WOMEN HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS IN AFRICA
 
The Special Rapporteur on
Human Rights Defenders in Africa is seeking input for a report on the
challenges faced by women defenders in Africa and their protection needs. 
If you are a woman
activist working alone or in association with others to promote and protect
human rights, and/or you’re someone who works on women’s rights or sexual
rights, including issues related to sexual orientation or gender identity, then
please do complete this questionnaire
(English). It is also available in French,
Arabic
and Portuguese.
It is open to those working at the national, regional or international levels.
The
deadline for submitting Questionnaire responses is 31 December 2012.  
Contacts: Sylvestre PAKABOMBA : spakmuk@yahoo.fr ; Claude
NDEMEYE : claudende5@yahoo.fr ; Anita BAGONA : bagonaa@yahoo.fr . 
E-mail: au-banjul@africa-union.org; Web www.achpr.org
The report comes at a time of growing
attention by the international and regional human rights systems to the
challenges and protection needs of women human rights defenders. In 2010, the
UN Special Rapporteur on human rights defenders produced a report on women
defenders, which was followed earlier this year by the first ever Human Rights
Council panel discussion on the same issue, held on the UN’s Annual Day of
Discussion on Women’s Rights.
The study on women human rights defenders in
Africa was initiated by the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights
(the African Commission) in a resolution passed just last month at the
Commission’s 52nd Ordinary Session (also available in French). The Special Rapporteur on Human
Rights Defenders in Africa is spearheading this process, and is preparing a
report that she will present to the African Commission at its next session, in
April 2013.
The report is anticipated to provide
recommendations for several stakeholders, including States, regarding the
protection of women defenders and the promotion of their work. These
recommendations will help to bring domestic standards and practice in line with
regional and international human rights standards, including the UN Declaration
on Human Rights Defenders. This will be the first time that the African
Commission provides such a focus on the situation of women defenders.
Take action!
Civil society engagement is crucial to ensure
the report reflects and analyses the situation of women defenders working in
different areas of human rights across the continent.
Please take the time to complete and return
the questionnaire above if it is relevant to you, and also forward it onto
colleagues and partners. Given that not everyone has email or responds to
questionnaires, any way you can actively encourage women defenders to provide
information would greatly assist the process.  The deadline for submitting
your responses is 31 December 2012.
Currently all the sub-regional human rights
defenders’ networks and several other national, regional and international
organisations that regularly engage at the African Commission are actively
encouraging women defenders to provide information about their experience.
For more on the challenges faced by women
human rights defenders and their specific protection needs, see Claiming Rights,
Claiming Justice, a handbook developed by the Women Human Rights
Defenders International Coalition. 