Egypt:  Sentencing of Mr. Alaa Abdel Fatah, Ms. Mona Seif and Mr. Ahmed Abdallah
January 10, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2014 / JanuaryEgypt: Sentencing of Mr. Alaa Abdel Fatah, Ms. Mona Seif and Mr. Ahmed Abdallah

New information
EGY 002 / 1113 / OBS 095.1
Sentencing / Arbitrary detention / 
Judicial harassment
Egypt
January
10, 2014
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and
requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Egypt.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the
sentencing of Mr. Alaa Abdel Fatah, civil and political rights
activist, blogger and member of the “No to Military Trials for Civilians”
movement, known for criticizing human rights abuses committed by security
forces and the army during the rule of the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces
(SCAF) and afterwards, Ms. Mona Seif, co-founder of the “No to Military
Trials for Civilians” movement, and Mr. Ahmed Abdallah, member of the 6
April Youth Movement and co-founder of the Egyptian Commission for Rights and
Freedoms, a group which documents and denounces human rights violations.
 
According to the information received, on January 5, 2014, North Giza
Criminal Court sentenced Mr. Fatah, Ms. Seif
and Mr. Abdallah to a
suspended sentence of one year in prison on charges of “arson”, “theft”,
“damage to property”, “violence” and “danger to public safety”. The charges are
based on allegations that Mr. Fatah, Ms. Seif and Mr. Abdallah
participated in the attack on the campaign headquarters of former presidential
candidate, Mr. Ahmed Shafiq, on May 28, 2012. The jail term is suspended for
three years and therefore should any of the defendants be found guilty of
additional charges within this time, this one-year term would be added onto any
subsequent sentences. The three human rights defenders intend to file an appeal
against their sentence.
 
The convictions are based solely on the evidence of so-called
eyewitnesses who were either agents of the government or persons with criminal
records or with criminal investigations pending against them. Furthermore, only
one of the said eyewitnesses was available for cross-examination and he
testified that he did not see Mr. Fatah in possession of any weapons or
committing violence. He also admitted that he could not recognise the other
defendants.
 
Unlike Ms. Seif and Mr. Abdallah, Mr. Abdel Fatah, who is kept
in prison for security reasons in relation to a case connected to the dispersed
Shura Council protest of November 26, 2013, did not attend the court session.
The Observatory highlights that though the Prosecutor referred Mr. Abdel Fatah
to a court with formal charges, this court has yet failed to set a date for the
trial to take place (See background information).
 
The Observatory denounces the conviction of the three human rights
defenders and calls on the appeal court to quash their conviction and
sentencing in so far as their sentencing seems to result from their legitimate
human rights activities. Finally, the Observatory calls for the immediate and
unconditional release of Mr. Abdel Fatah. 

 
Background information:
 
On November 26, 2013 at least nine members of the “No to Military Trials
for Civilians” group, including Ms. Mona Seif, nine journalists and seven
lawyers were arrested by police forces in Cairo, as they were demonstrating
near Tahrir Square[1].
In an effort to pressure the members of the Constitutional Committee to vote
against Article 198, the “No to Military Trials for Civilians” group had called
for protests to be held on November 26, ahead of the vote, in front of the
Shura Council (where the committee holds its meetings). Tens of protesters
joined the call at 4pm on Kasr Al Aini street, however thirty minutes later,
security forces issued a warning to the protesters to immediately end their
protest, which reportedly remained peaceful. The protesters refused to leave
and security forces opened water canons against them. Security forces and
policemen in plain cloth simultaneously arrested protesters and journalists[2].
 
On November 28, 2013, security operatives raided Mr. Abdel Fatah's
residence. Although they produced no search warrant, they searched the premises
and carted away computers and telephones. When challenged for not being
authorised to conduct a search, they beat Mr. Abdel Fatah and his wife up while
their two year-old son slept in the next room. 
 
Egyptian authorities issued a warrant for Mr. Abdel Fatah's arrest after
they accused him of incitement and involvement in the calls for protests by the
“No to Military Trials for Civilians” movement, which was protesting Article
198 of the draft constitution that allows for civilian trials before military
courts. Mr. Abdel Fatah was then placed under pre-trial detention.
 
On December 9, 2013, Mr. Abdel Fatah and 24 other individuals were
referred to the Cairo Criminal Court with charges of “blocking roads”,
“assembling illegally”, “protesting without a permit”, “acquiring weapons
during a protest”, and “attacking and injuring a public servant” and “stealing
his personal wireless device”. The court has not set a trial date since then. 23
were released on bail on December 4, 2013. Mr. Abdel Fatah and another
individual arrested in the vicinity of the demonstration are detained in Tora
Prison.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities of Egypt asking them to:
 
i.      Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
of Mr. Abdel Fatah, Ms. Mona Seif and Mr. Ahmed Abdallah and all human rights
defenders in Egypt;
 
ii.     Quash the conviction and
sentence pronounced against Mr. Abdel Fatah, Ms.
Mona Seif and Mr. Ahmed Abdallah and release Mr. Abdel Fatah immediately and
unconditionally, as well as all human rights
defenders currently in detention, since their detention is arbitrary as it seems to
only aim at curtailing their human rights activities;
 
iii.    Order an
immediate, thorough, transparent investigation into the above-mentioned
allegations of ill-treatments against Mr. Abdel
Fatah and his wife in order to identify
all those responsible, bring them before an independent tribunal, and apply
them the sanctions provided by the law;
 
iv.    Put an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level,
against Mr. Abdel Fatah, Ms. Mona Seif and Mr. Ahmed Abdallah and all human
rights defenders in Egypt;
 
v.     Comply with all the
provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in
particular with:
-      its Article 1, which
provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-      its Article 5 (a):
“For the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental
freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in association with others,
at the national and international levels (a) To meet or assemble peacefully”;
 
vi.     Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Egypt. 
 
Addresses
 
·       
President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, H.E. Adly Mansour, Abedine
Palace, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 23901998
·       
Prime Minister Mr. Hazem El Biblawi, Magles El Shaab Street, Kasr El
Aini Street, Cairo, Egypt. Fax: + 202 2735 6449 /
27958016. Email: primemin@idsc.gov.eg
·       
Minister of the Interior, General Mohamed Ibrahim, Ministry of the
Interior, El-Sheikh Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: moi1@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2579 2031 / 2794
5529
·       
Minister of Justice, Mr. Adel Abdel Hamid, Ministry of Justice, Magles
El Saeb Street, Wezaret Al Adl, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2795 8103
·       
Public Prosecutor, Counsellor Hisham Barakat Dar al-Qadha al-Ali, Ramses
Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 2577 4716
·       
National Council For Human Rights, Fax: + 202 25747497 / 25747670
·       
H.E.
Ms. Wafaa Bassim, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations in Geneva, 49 avenue
Blanc, 1202 Genève, Switzerland, Email: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41 22 738 44 15
·       
Embassy of Egypt in Brussels, 19 avenue de l’Uruguay, 1000 Brussels,
Belgium, Fax: +32 2 675.58.88; Email: embassy.egypt@skynet.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Egypt in
your respective country.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, January
10, 2014
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the
protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in
their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·      
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25
18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49
39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1] See FIDH-OMCT Press Statement issued
on November 29, 2013.


[2] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sXa3QtLw5uw 