Egypt:   Allegations of torture and ill-treatment suffered by Mr. Mahmoud Ragab Ibrahim in al-Hadra Prision, Alexandria
March 24, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2011 / MarchEgypt:  Allegations of torture and ill-treatment suffered by Mr. Mahmoud Ragab Ibrahim in al-Hadra Prision, AlexandriaEGY 240311Torture
and ill-treatment/ Arbitrary detention/ Release/ Risk of impunity 
The International
Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your
URGENT intervention in the following situation in Egypt. 
Brief description of the situation
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by The Egyptian
Organization for Human Rights (EOHR), a member organisation of the SOS-Torture
Network, about the allegations of torture and ill-treatment, and arbitrary
detention suffered by Mr. Mahmoud Ragab Ibrahim, a 21-years old
craftsman from Alexandria, by prison
guards of the al-Hadra Prision, in Alexandria.
According
to the information received, on 1 February 2011, Mr. Ibrahim was passing through
the area of Sidi Beshr, in the city of Alexandria, around 5:30 p.m., when he was approached by
members of the community watches[1]. They considered him
suspicious and he was subsequently handed over to the Command Center of the Northern Area of the Armed
Forces (CCNAAF), despite having presented his national identification card to
the community watches members.
Mr. Mahmoud Ragab Ibrahim was thereafter brought to the al-Hadara prison
on no legal grounds. He was never presented before any competent judicial
authority during his detention. In al-Hadara prison, he was forced to wear the
detainee uniform and allegedly beaten and tortured by the guards. As a
consequence of these acts he bore deep wound on his thighs, cut wounds on his
back, feet and arms and moreover swelled feet, and arms, and a swelled left
eye. To this date, no legal charges were brought against Mr. Ibrahim. 
According to the same information, the
family of Mr. Ibrahim received, on 10 February 2011,
a phone call from an alleged “citizen” informing them that their detained
relative had been released next to the al-Mughawreen Mosque, near the al-Hadra
prison. When the family went to the mentioned place, they found Mr. Mahmoud
Ragab Ibrahim unconscious and in a severe state of fatigue. The days before,
the family had been asking for Mr. Ibrahim at the CCNAAF, where they were told
that he had been transferred to the Central Military Prison in Cairo, but there
was no sign of Mr. Ibrahim. Subsequently his family looked for him in other
military prisons and went back to CCNAAF where again they received no
satisfactory answer. 
Mr. Ibrahim's family reported the
incident to the General Prosecution Office of East Alexandria. The family
accuses the administration of al-Hadra prison of detaining Mr. Mahmoud
Ragab Ibrahim without any legal charges and of alleged torture. The report was
registered under number 385 for the year 2011 under the petition of the General
Prosecution Office of East Alexandria. The case is reportedly being currently investigated by the Public
Prosecutor. 
OMCT is gravely concerned about the alleged facts and recalls that Egypt is a State party to the UN
Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR), which both prohibit torture and ill-treatment, at all times.
In line with their obligations under these treaties,
it is incumbent on the competent authorities to consider seriously any
allegations of torture and ill-treatment, and to undertake a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial
investigation in this regard in order to identify all those
responsible, bring them to trial and apply adequate sanctions. 
Finally, OMCT
recalls that the victims of torture and ill-treatment must be ensured the right
to an effective remedy for the human rights violations suffered as well as the
right to full redress, including compensation and rehabilitation. 
Action requested       
 
Please write to the authorities in Egypt urging them to:
i.                    
Take
all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Mahmoud Ragab Ibrahim;
ii.                  
Carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent
and impartial investigation into the abovementioned facts, in particular the
allegations of torture and ill-treatment, the result of which must be made
public, in order to bring those responsible before a competent, independent and
impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as
provided by law;
iii.                 
Ensure that an effective remedy as well as the right
to full redress, including compensation and rehabilitation, is granted to Mr. Mahmoud Ragab Ibrahim;
iv.                
Guarantee
the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country
in accordance with international human rights standards.
Addresses
Ø     
Vice-President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, HE. Omar
Souleiman, Abedine Palace, Cairo, E-mail: webmaster@presidency.gov.eg, Fax:
+202 2390 1998 
Ø     
Prime Minister,
Dr. Essam Sharaf,Magles El Shaab Street, Kasr El Aini Street, Cairo,
Fax: + 202 2735 6449 / 27958016. Email: primemin@idsc.gov.eg
Ø     
Egyptian Public Prosecutor,Counsellor Abdel Meguid Mahmoud Abdel Meguid, Dar al Qadha
al-'Ali, Ramses Street, Cairo,
Egypt, Fax: + 20 2 2577 4716; 
Ø     
Minister of Interior,
General Mansour El-Essaoui, 25 Al-Sheikh Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo,
Egypt,El-Sheikh Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo Email: center@iscmi.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2579 2031
/ 2794 5529 
Ø     
Minister of Justice,
Mr. Mohamed El Gendy, Ministry of Justice, Magles El Saeb Street, Wezaret Al
Adl, Cairo, Fax: +202 2795 8103, E-mail:
mojeb@idsc.gov.eg
Ø     
National Council for Human Rights, 1113 Corniche El Nil, Midane Al Tahrir, Specialized National Councils
Building – 11th floor, NDP Building, Cairo, Fax:  +2022 574 7497,
Email:  nchr@nchr.org.eg.
Ø     
Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations in
Geneva,Avenue Blanc 49, 1202 Geneva, Fax: +41 22
738 44 15, Email: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int

Please
also write to the embassies of Egypt
in your respective country.
*******
Geneva, 24 March 2011
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.



[1] On 28 January 2011, during the first week of
the Egyptian protests, the security forces withdrew from the streets leaving
the preservation of public order to the military forces. Moreover several
prisons were then opened, releasing prisoners, and in addition most of the
police stations were burnt down and many weapons disappeared. As a consequence
of these events and the increasing insecurity in the country, the so-called
community watches or Ligan Sha’biya were formed, composed by residents
of the respective neighbourhoods. They stopped cars and persons, and handed any
suspect person over to the military forces, especially if the concerned person
couldn’t present a valid identification document and was considered suspicious,
in particular persons who were not from the neighbourhood. The community
watches are no longer active. 