Egypt:  Continued arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Ms. Mahienour El-Massry
July 21, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2014 / JulyEgypt: Continued arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Ms. Mahienour El-MassryARABIC VERSION_Continued arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Ms. Mahienour El-Massry3 pages / 123 KB​

New information
EGY 001 / 0514 / OBS 045.2
Arbitrary detention / Sentencing /
Judicial harassment / 
Repression of peaceful protest
Egypt
July
21, 2014
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme
of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in
Egypt.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the
continued arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Ms. Mahienour
El-Massry, a human rights
lawyer known for her activism in favour of judicial independence and prisoners'
rights by organising peaceful protests, support activities for political
prisoners and using social media to denounce human rights violations, following
her participation in a peaceful protest aimed at denouncing police repression
in Egypt. 
 
According to the information received, on July 20, 2014, after
successive adjournments, the Sidi Gaber Appeal Misdemeanour Court in Alexandria
decided to reduce the two-year jail sentence against Ms. Mahienour El-Massry
for “protest without a permit” and “assaulting security forces” to six
months.  
 
However, the Court did not reduce the amount of her fine that remains
unchanged at EGP 50,000 (approximately EUR 5,143). Ms. Mahienour El-Massry is
detained in Damanhour prison since May 20, 2014 and has already completed two
months of her sentence.
 
Moreover, Ms. El-Massry is also facing trial on separate charges for an
incident that occurred in March 2013 (see background information below). The
case was heard on July 21, 2014 and at this date the judge postponed it again
to October 13, 2014.
 
The case of Ms. Mahienour Al Masry is illustrative of a wider repression
campaign targeting human rights defenders opposing the current regime in the
country since the “Protest Law”[1]
was passed in November 2013. This controversial law bans gathering of 10 or
more people without a permit issued by the authorities. Based on this law,
dozens of human rights defenders are arbitrarily detained and prosecuted. 
 
The Observatory expresses its concern regarding the ongoing arbitrary
detention and judicial harassment of Ms. Mahienour El-Massry, which seems to
aim only at preventing her from carrying out her peaceful human rights
activities, and calls upon the Egyptian judicial authorities to immediately and
unconditionally release her.  
 
Background
information: 
 
On
January 2, 2014, Alexandria Manshiya Misdemeanour Court sentenced in
absentia Ms. Mahienour El-Massry and seven other members of the political
group “Revolutionary Socialists”[2],
including human rights lawyer Mr. Hassan Mustafa[3],
to two years’ imprisonment and a fine of EGP 50,000 for “protest without a
permit” and “assaulting security forces” following their participation in a
peaceful protest on December 2, 2013 to denounce police violence and in
particular Khaled Saeed murder's retrial. Khaled Saeed was killed by police
forces on June 6, 2012 and subsequently became a symbol of police repression
during the 2011 Egyptian Revolution. Ms. Mahienour El-Massry failed to appear
as she had not been informed of the date of the hearing. 
 
In
a separate incident, on May 8, 2014, Ms. El-Massry was referred to court on
charges of “assaulting security forces” after after, in March 2014, she and
other lawyers went to Raml police station to provide legal assistance to three
activists who were arrested and sent to the police by supporters of the Muslim
Brotherhood. The lawyers were attacked by the police in the police station, and
Ms. El-Massry was detained briefly before the Prosecution decided to release
her and the others. The trial was then postponed several times following the resignation
of the appointed judge resigned from the bench.
 
On
May 20, 2014, the Sidi Gaber Misdemeanour Court in Alexandria rejected the
objection filed by Ms. Mahienour El-Massry regarding the sentence
issued against her in absentia. Ms. Mahienour El-Massry was immediately
detained following the hearing. 
 
The
appeal to the May 20 decision of Ms. Mahienour El-Massry was scheduled for June
26, 2014. According to her lawyers, the appeal date was too far away in
violation of criminal law procedural provisions. Therefore, the lawyers filed
on May 22, 2014 a request for an earlier appeal date but that was not
granted.  
 
On May 22, 2014, the Egyptian security forces violently repressed
participants to a solidarity march organised outside of the headquarters of
Egyptian Center for Economic & Social Rights (ECESR) in Alexandria,
following a press conference organised to show support for Mahienour El-Massry,
Once the march ended, the security forces stormed into ECESR’s headquarters two
times, smashed its contents and arrested its employers. Several female
protesters were sexually harassed by security forces. In the meantime,
activists who participated in the march were chased on the side streets. 
 
Several human rights defenders and political activists were beaten and
arrested by the police. They were detained in Alexandria Security Directorate.
Then they were released after seizing the case’s file of Ms. Mahienour
El-Massry along with the clearance that was issued by security bodies to some
activists in order to visit the activist in the prison. Some other documents
were also impounded. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Egypt asking them to:
 
i.      Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
of Ms. Mahienour El-Massry and all human rights defenders in Egypt;
 
ii.     Release Ms. Mahienour El-Massry immediately and unconditionally, as well as all human rights defenders currently in detention, since their detention is arbitrary as it seems to only aim at curtailing
their human rights activities; 
 
iii.   Put an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level,
against Ms. Mahienour El-Massry and all human rights defenders in Egypt;
 
iv.    Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, in particular with:
-     
its Article 1, which
provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-     
its Article 5(a): “For
the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms,
everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, at the
national and international levels (a) To meet or assemble peacefully”
-     
its Article 6(a), which
foresees that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to participate in peaceful activities against violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms”;
-     
its Article 12.2, which
provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 
v.     Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Egypt.
 
Addresses
 
· President of the Arab Republic
of Egypt, H.E. Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202
23901998
· Prime Minister, Mr. Ibrahim
Mehleb, Magles El Shaab Street, Kasr El Aini Street, Cairo, Egypt. Fax: + 202
2735 6449 / 27958016. Email: primemin@idsc.gov.eg
· Minister of the Interior,
General Mohamed Ibrahim Moustafa, Ministry of the Interior, El-Sheikh Rihan
Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: moi1@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2579 2031 / 2794 5529
· Minister of Justice, Mr. Mahfouz
Saber, Ministry of Justice, Magles El Saeb Street, Wezaret Al Adl, Cairo,
Egypt, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2795 8103
· Public Prosecutor, Counsellor
Hisham Barakat Dar al-Qadha al-Ali, Ramses Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 2577
4716
· Mr. Mohamed Fayeq, President of
the National Council For Human Rights, Fax: + 202 25747497 / 25747670. Email: nchr@nchr.org.eg
· H.E. Ms. Wafaa Bassim, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United
Nations in Geneva, 49 avenue Blanc, 1202 Genève, Switzerland, Email: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41 22 738 44 15
· Embassy of Egypt in Brussels, 19 avenue de l’Uruguay, 1000 Brussels,
Belgium, Fax: +32 2 675.58.88; Email: egyptembassy@embassyofegypt.be

Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Egypt in
your respective country.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, July 21,
2014
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the
protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in
their time of need. 
 



[1] Law No. 107 of
2013 on the Right to Public Meetings, Processions and Peaceful Demonstrations.


[2] The Revolutionary
Socialists joined with other movements in rejecting, opposing, and protesting
against an anti-protest law passed by the Egyptian transitional government in 2013.


[3] Mr. Hassan Mustafa, who was also sentenced in absentia, has not
been arrested and he has not "objected" to his sentence yet. See
Observatory Urgent Appeal EGY 001 / 0313 / OBS 027 of March 20, 2013. 