Cameroon:  Arbitrary detention of five members of the Esu Youth Development Association (EYDA)
July  8, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cameroon / 2016 / JulyCameroon: Arbitrary detention of five members of the Esu Youth Development Association (EYDA)

CMR 001 / 0716
/ OBS 056
Judicial
harassment / Arbitrary detention
Cameroon
July 8, 2016
 
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for
Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Cameroon.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The Observatory
has been informed by reliable sources about the continuing arbitrary detention
of Messrs. Redemption Godlove, Kpwe Philip Abue, Biame Divine,
Azong Cyprian and Fuh Bernard, members of the Esu Youth Development
Association (EYDA)[1], at the Bamenda
Central Prison. The five are community leaders opposing land-grabbing
undertaken on the land of the Esu community (North-West Cameroon) by Mr. Baba Ahmadou Danpullo, a billionaire
businessman, cattle rancher, tea plantation owner and a member of the Central
Committee of the ruling Cameroon People’s Democratic Movement (CPDM) party[2].
 
According to the
information received, on April 22, 2016 at 2 a.m, Mr. Redemption Godlove was
arrested without a warrant at his home in Esu[3] by six plain-clothes
gendarmes, and taken to the gendarmerie legion in Bamenda for
interrogation on trumped-up accusations of “arson” and “vandalism”[4]. He was
subsequently transferred to Bamenda Central Prison. On May 9, 2016, Mr. Biame
Divine, Mr. Azong Cyprian and Mr. Fuh Bernard were summoned at the gendarmerie
legion of Bamenda, and then taken to Bamenda Central Prison under the same
accusations of “arson” and “vandalism”. On May 25, 2016, Mr. Kpwe Philip Abue
was in turn arrested at a routine identity card checkpoint, and placed in
detention at Bamenda Central Prison on the same grounds.
 
On May 31, 2016,
the Chambers of the Examining Magistrate of the High Court of Mezam Division
Holden at Bamenda ruled on a Preliminary Objection filed by Barrister Fon
Robert, on behalf of the five above-mentioned defendants as well as of four
other EYDA members who are prosecuted in the same case but were not arrested,
namely Mr. Kagha Mbong Ephraim, Mr. Wung Emmanuel, Mr. Meh Ivo
and Mr. Meh Williams. Examining Magistrate Justice Francis Ndip Oben
relied upon Section 140 of the Criminal Procedure Code[5]
to decline jurisdiction, and withdrew the remand warrant against Mr. Redemption
Godlove, thereby cancelling those upon which the other four were detained[6], and
effectively ordering their release. 
 
In spite of this court decision, the Bamenda Central
Prison authorities have kept the five human rights defenders in detention,
under the above-mentioned accusations. The charges relate to a complaint filed in May 2016 by
Mr. Baba Ahmadou Danpullo against the nine above-mentioned community leaders
and the Fon (traditional ruler) of Esu, HRH
Kum Achuo II, for alleged burning down of huts belonging to the workers of
his “ELBA ranch”[7].
However, it is reported that around 50 gendarmes are stationed in the area
since March 11, 2016[8], thereby making it impossible that the Esu activists
may have gone around the area and burnt down huts.
 
The next hearing of Mr. Kpwe Philip Abue is
scheduled for July 12, 2016 before the High Court of Mezam in Bamenda[9].

 
The
Observatory condemns the arbitrary
detention and judicial harassment of the above-mentioned land rights defenders,
which only aim at sanctioning their legitimate peaceful human rights activities opposing
land-grabbing.
 
Accordingly, the
Observatory calls upon the Cameroon authorities to release immediately and
unconditionally Messrs. Redemption Godlove, Kpwe Philip Abue, Biame Divine,
Azong Cyprian and Fuh Bernard, and to put an end
to the ongoing harassment, including at judicial level, against the above-mentioned community leaders.
 
Background
information:
 
In 2015, Mr. Baba Ahmadou Danpullo attempted to
establish a land certificate on the Esu land. The Esu community leaders
subsequently filed a case requesting Mr. Danpullo to prove the land ownership.
Instead of providing this proof, Mr. Danpullo filed a case based on trumped-up
charges of defamation against Barrister Robert Fon, the Esu community lawyer,
claiming 100 million FCFA, alleging that he had paid the Governor of the
North-West and other officials 50 million FCFA to own the land. These
developments are part of the pattern of judicial harassment to deprive the Esu
community of legal counsel. Mr. Fon is also lawyer for the Mbororo community
that has been resisting abuses by Mr. Danpullo over several years[10].
 
The Observatory
recalls that this wave of arbitrary arrests and detentions is part of a larger
policy, which started 30 years ago when Mr. Danpullo grabbed nearly half of the
Esu village, and failed to respond to dialogue attempts undertaken by the
villagers through their traditional leaders. Such operations turned into a
massive harassment on the local population and youth leaders of the Esu
community, who had always been peacefully challenging the decisions.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of
Cameroon and ask them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of Mr. Redemption Godlove, Kpwe Philip Abue, Biame Divine, Azong Cyprian
and Fuh Bernard;
 
ii. Put an end to all acts of harassment - including
at the administrative and judicial level - against them as well as against the
Esu community and all human rights defenders in Cameroon;
 
iii. Conform in any circumstances with the provisions
of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on
December 9, 1998 by the UN General Assembly, in particular its Articles 1 and
12.2;
 
iv. Ensure in all
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human
rights instruments ratified by Cameroon.
 
Addresses:
 
·      
Mr. Paul Biya, President of the
Republic of Cameroon, Fax +237 22 22 08 70
·      
Mr. Philémon Yang, Prime Minister
and Chief of Government of Cameroon, Fax: +237 22 23 57 35. Email:
spm@spm.gov.cm 
·      
Mr. Laurent Esso, Minister of
Justice of Cameroon, Fax: + 237 22 23 00 05
·      
Mr. René Emmanuel SADI, Minister of
Territorial Administration of Cameroon, Fax: + 237 22 22 37 35
·      
Dr. Chemuta Divine Banda, President
of the National Commission on Human Rights and Freedoms, Fax: +237 22 22 60 82,
E-mail: cndhl@iccnet.cm / cdbanda26@yahoo.fr 
·      
Ms. Enonchong Annet, Protection
Officer of the National Commission on Human Rights and Freedoms of Cameroon,
E-mail: annet_mbeng@yahoo.com 
·      
H.E. Mr. Anatole
Fabien Nkou, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Republic of
Cameroon to the United Nations Office in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 736
21 65, Email: mission.cameroun@bluewin.ch 
·      
H.E. Mr. Daniel
Evina Abe'e, Ambassador,
Embassy of the Republic of Cameroon in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 344 57
35; E-mail: ambassade.cameroun@skynet.be 
 
Please also write to diplomatic
representations of Cameroon in your respective countries.



[1] The EYDA aims at promoting
and protecting human rights, and notably the land rights of the Esu community.


[2] In 1986, Mr. Baba Ahmadou Danpullo established two
cattle ranches in the Boyo and Menchum divisions of the North-West Region. He
allegedly forced farming communities from their lands without compensation,
which made him the largest single private landowner in the region. Since then,
the landowner, who is said to have close links with the authorities, has been
involved in land disputes with people peacefully defending their land.


[3] Esu is a village in the
Menchum Division of the North West Region in Cameroon.


[4] “Arson” and “vandalism”
are punished under Article
227 of the Cameroon Penal Code. Besides, Article 316 and 317 sanction acts of
“destruction”, while Article 236 provides sanctions for acts of “looting
committed by an organised group”.


[5] Section 140 states : (1) the competent State
Counsel shall be either: (a) That of the place of commission of the offence; or
(b) that of the place of residence of the suspect; or (c) that of the place of
arrest of the suspect. (2) When more than one State Counsel are seized of the
same matter, priority shall be given to the State Counsel in whose jurisdiction
the offence was committed.


[6] The remands were issued on
the same alleged grounds by the State Counsel (Procureur) of Bamenda on the day of the arrest of each of the five
EYDA members. However, as the remand warrant was withdrawn for the first
defendant, there can be no basis to pursue the rest individually for the same
alleged crime.


[7] On January 18, 2016, farmhouses belonging to Esu
people were reportedly burnt down by workers of the ELBA Ranch, belonging to
Mr. Baba Ahmadou Danpullo. 


[8] Mr. Danpullo has requested
gendarmerie protection to stop Esu people from farming in parts of the land he
is claiming. The gendarmes are located between the access road to the ranch and
Esu village. As there is a river in between, no one can go to the ranch without
being seen or stopped by the gendarmes.


[9] Each defender is due to
appear individually. Besides, the Fon of
Esu was summoned on May 24, 2016 by Colonel Guy Beyegue, Commander of the
gendarmerie legion for the North-West Region, and threatened of destitution as
a reprisal for his refusal to support the illegal takeover of his village by
Mr. Danpullo. 


[10] Members of the Mbororo
Social and Cultural Development Association (MBOSCUDA), an organisation
defending the rights of Mbororo pastoralists in North-Western Cameroon since
1992, have faced similar harassment over the past years after a complaint filed
against them by Mr. Baba Ahmadou Danpullo. See Observatory Urgent Appeal CMR 002/0613/OBS 049 of July 7, 2013 and
Observatory Annual Report 2014. 