India:  Intimidation and harassment against Ms. Ranjeeta Sadokpam and her family
March 13, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / India / 2018 / MarchIndia: Intimidation and harassment against Ms. Ranjeeta Sadokpam and her family​IND 001 / 0318 / OBS 028Harassment / Intimidation
India
March 13, 2018
 
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent intervention in the following situation
in India.
 
Brief description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by
reliable sources about acts of intimidation and harassment against Ms. Ranjeeta
Sadokpam and her family. Ms.
Sadopkam is a researcher with Human
Rights Alert (HRA)[1], based in Manipur, India.
 
According to the information received, on February 27, 2018, at around 1 am,
Ms. Ranjeeta Sadokpam was harassed and intimidated by mixed police and army
personnel who knocked on her door and attempted to conduct a search of her home.
The police and army personnel were allegedly looking for an individual named “Somendro”,
who would allegedly be a member of the United National
Liberation Front (UNLF).

 
Despite Ms. Sadokpam’s insistence that the so-called “Somendro”
was not present in her home, an army officer insisted that they were authorized
to conduct a search[2]. After
discussing the situation with her family, Ms. Sadokpam went out of her home to talk
with the army officer. She then noticed that many army personnel were deployed around
her neighbourhood along with Manipur police officers and an unidentified masked
man.
 
Ms. Sadokpam spoke with the army officer and
cooperated by providing details about the identities of all her family members who
lived in her home and the adjacent apartment. Meanwhile, the team cornered Ms.
Sadokpam’s younger brother, whom the combined team seemed to suspect of being “Somendro”.
Despite Ms. Sadokpam’s insistence that he was not “Somendro”, the army officer
and his personnel spoke to him outside the house before they could confirm that
he was not “Somendro”.
 
The army officer then asked Ms.
Sadokpam’s family members to sign a statement that they
were not allowed to read. After they reluctantly
signed the paper, the mixed police and military personnel left the premises. 
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the harassment and intimidation of Ms. Ranjeeta
Sadokpam and her family, which seems aimed at sanctioning her legitimate human
rights activities, particularly at a time when the Central Bureau of
Investigation and the National Human Rights Commission are conducting an
investigation upon orders of the Supreme Court regarding 90 cases of
extrajudicial executions involving the Manipur police and the army, in which
HRA is a petitioner[3]. 
 
The
Observatory has also been informed of several other
recent incidents of violence, harassment, intimidation, and threats against
human rights defenders in Manipur by police and armed forces, including against
a member of the Extrajudicial Execution Victims’ Families Association, Manipur
(EEVFAM) and a legal representative of many of the victims involved in the
EEVFAM and Another Vs. Union of India and Another [Writ Petition (Criminal)]
129 of 2012.
 
The Observatory calls upon the Indian authorities to
put an end to all acts of harassment and intimidation against Ms. Ranjeeta
Sadokpam, her family members, and all defenders who support the EEVFAM petition,
and undertake a prompt, thorough and impartial investigation in the above-mentioned
events.
 
The Observatory is concerned that under Section 4(d) of the Armed Forces Special Powers Act
(AFPSA), the Indian armed forces have the power to enter and search without
warrant any premises to make arrests, which provides the legal basis for arbitrariness
and abuses, including against human rights defenders, as illustrated by the
case of Ms. Sadokpam.  
 
The Observatory urges the Indian authorities to urgently
implement the recommendation formulated by then United Nations Special Rapporteur
on the Situation of Human Rights Defenders Ms. Margaret Sekaggya upon
completion of her official visit to India in January 2011 to repeal the AFSPA[4].
 
Actions requested: 
 
Please write to
the authorities in India, urging them to:
 
i. Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical
and psychological integrity of Ms. Ranjeeta Sadokpam, her family, and all human rights defenders in India;
 
ii.
Put an end to any harassment against all human rights
defenders in India, and ensure in all circumstances that they are able to carry
out their legitimate activities without any hindrance and fear of reprisals;
 
iii.
Conduct a prompt, independent, and thorough investigation on the aforementioned
acts of harassment and intimidation against Ms. Ranjeeta Sadokpam in order to
identify the perpetrators, bring them before an independent tribunal, and
sanction them as provided by the law;
 
iv. Repeal the Armed Forces
Special Powers Act (AFSPA) without further delay;
 
v. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration
on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United
Nations on December 9, 1998, in particular with Articles 1 and 12.2;
 
vi. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by India.
 
Addresses: 
 
·    
Mr. Shri Narendra Damodardas
Modi, Prime Minister of India, Fax: + 91 11 2301 6857. E-mail: pmosb@pmo.nic.in / manmo@sansad.in
·    
Mr. Raj Nath Singh, Union
Minister of Home Affairs of India, Fax: +91 11 2309 2979. Email: dirfcra-mha@gov.in
·    
Mr. Rajiv Gauba, Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs of India, Email: hshso@nic.in
·    
Justice Dipak Misra, Chief Justice of India,
Supreme Court, of India, Fax: +91 11 233 83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.in
·    
Justice Shri H.L. Dattu, Chairperson of the National
Human Rights Commission of India, Fax +91 11 2465 1329. Email: chairnhrc@nic.in
·    
Mr. Biren Singh, Chief Minister of the
Government of Manipur, Fax: +91 385 242 11 71, Email: cmmani@man.nic.in
·    
Mr. Rajani Ranjan Rashmi, Chief Secretary
of the Government of Manipur, Fax: +91 385 245 2629, Email:
cs-manipur@nic.in
·    
Chairperson of the Manipur
State Human Rights Commission, Email: mhrc@man.nic.in
·    
Mr. Srinivasa Kammath, Focal Point on Human Rights Defenders, National
Human Rights Commission of India, Email: hrd-nhrc@nic.in
·    
H.E. Mr. Rajiv Kumar Chander, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of India to the
United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 906 86 96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
·    
H.E. Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri,
Embassy of India to the European Union, Belgium and Luxembourg in Brussels,
Belgium, Fax: +32 2 6489638 / +32 2 6451869
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of India located in your
country.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, March 13, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the
Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme is to prevent or remedy
situations of repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both
members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.




[1] For more than two decades, HRA has been documenting human rights
violations and organising victims of Manipur and north-east India to access
human rights redressal mechanisms both at national and international levels. In
particular, HRA is a petitioner of the Extrajudicial Execution Victim’s
Families Association, Manipur (EEVFAM) and Another Vs. Union of India and
Another [Writ Petition (Criminal) 129 of 2012] to the Supreme Court of India.
The EEVFAM’s petition to the Supreme Court demanded an investigation to be launched
into 1,528 reported cases of extrajudicial killings that took place in Manipur
between May 1979 to 2012. The Court decided in favour of EEVFAM and ordered the
Central Bureau of Investigation to initiate an investigation into these cases.  


[2]
Under the Armed Forces Special
Powers Act (AFSPA) Section 4 (d), armed forces have the power to “enter and
search without warrant any premises to make any such arrest as aforesaid or to
recover any person believed to be wrongfully restrained or confined or any property
reasonably suspected to be stolen property or any arms, ammunition or explosive
substances believed to be unlawfully kept in such premises, and may for that
purpose use such force as may be necessary”.


[3]
See above footnote 1 for more information.


[4] See UN Document A/HRC/19/55/Add.1,
February 6, 2012. 