United States:  Arbitrary arrest, ill-treatment, and subsequent deportation of Mr. Jerome Succor Aba
April 26, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / United States / 2018 / AprilUnited States: Arbitrary arrest, ill-treatment, and subsequent deportation of Mr. Jerome Succor Aba​USA 001 / 0418 / OBS 055Arbitrary detention / Ill-treatment / 
Release / Obstacles to freedoms of 
movement and assembly
USA
April 26, 2018
 
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent intervention in the following situation
in the United States of America (USA).
 
Brief description of the information:
 
The Observatory
has been informed by the Alliance
for the Advancement of People’s Rights (Karapatan) about the arbitrary arrest, ill-treatment,
and subsequent deportation of Mr. Jerome Succor Aba, Chairperson of the human rights organisation Suara Bangsamoro,
Co-Chairperson of the Sanduogu Movement of Moro and Indigenous Peoples for
Self-Determination, and peace activist, upon his
arrival in the USA.
 
According to the information received, on April 17, 2018, at around 8 pm,
Mr. Jerome Succor Aba was
arrested by US Department of Homeland Security and US Customs and Border
Protection officials upon his arrival at San Francisco International Airport.
Mr. Aba had travelled to the USA
to participate as a resource speaker in the 2018 Ecumenical Advocacy Days and the
Stop the Killings Speaking Tour in Washington D.C., arranged by the Human
Rights Office of the Global Ministries of the United
Methodist Church and the US chapter of the International Coalition on Human
Rights in the Philippines (ICHRP). Mr. Aba had been granted a ten-year multiple
entry visa by the US Embassy in Manila on March 27, 2018, prior to travelling
to the USA. He was notably expected to join various activities in the US to discuss the human
rights situation and martial law in Mindanao, Southern Philippines, under the
administration of President Rodrigo Duterte.
 
Immediately after being arrested, Mr. Aba was taken from the immigration desk to the Homeland Security office for
interrogation, where he underwent a thorough body search, was forced to strip
naked, had all his belongings confiscated, and was handcuffed. 
 
Throughout the interrogation, officials accused him of being a
“terrorist” and a “communist”. He was not read his Miranda rights until the end
of his interrogation, and his right to remain silent was omitted. Despite his repeated
requests, he was denied access to a lawyer. Human rights organisations
protesting outside the airport also insisted on gaining access to him, but were
not allowed to speak to him. Following his interrogation, he was forced to sign
several blank documents and give a statement on camera stating that he had not been
tortured by the authorities, under the impression that it would make his
release possible.
 
At no time during his detention was Mr. Aba granted access to a
lawyer, nor was he given a clear reason for his detention or denial of entry in
the USA. It was only towards the end of this detention that he was able to
speak with the Philippine Consulate over the phone.
 
At 12:30 am on April 19, 2018, Mr. Aba was put on a plane back to the
Philippines. Once the plane landed in Manila, the cabin crew handed Mr. Aba his
cell phone together with his flight ticket from
Manila to Davao.
 
The Observatory strongly
condemns the ill-treatment, arbitrary detention, and subsequent deportation of Mr.
Jerome Succor Aba, and calls upon the US authorities to guarantee in all
circumstances the right to freedom of movement, peaceful assembly, and
association of all human rights defenders in the USA.
 
The Observatory further urges the
Government of the Philippines to ensure
that Mr.
Jerome Succor Aba will not be subjected
to further acts of harassment in the Philippines.
 
Actions requested: 
 
Please write to
the authorities in the United States of America urging them to:
 
i. Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical
and psychological integrity of Mr. Jerome Succor Aba as well as
of all human rights defenders in the USA;
 
ii. Guarantee in
all circumstances the freedoms of movement, peaceful assembly and association of Mr. Jerome Succor Aba, as
well as of
all human rights defenders in the USA;
 
iii. Put an end to any kind of harassment against Mr. Jerome Succor Aba, as well as
of all human rights defenders in the USA, especially
through the use of immigration laws, and ensure in all circumstances that they
are able to carry out their legitimate activities without any hindrance and
fear of reprisals; 
 
iv.
Conduct a prompt, independent, and thorough investigation into the
above-mentioned events, in order
to identify all those responsible, bring them before an independent tribunal,
and sanction them as provided by the law;

 
v. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration
on Human Rights, and the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by
the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, and in
particular to Articles 1, 5, 12.1 and 12.2;
 
vi. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by the USA.
 
Please write to
the authorities in the Philippines, urging them to:
 
i. Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and
psychological integrity of Mr. Jerome Succor Aba, as
well as of all human rights defenders in the Philippines;
 
ii. Refrain from any acts of harassment against Mr. Jerome Succor Aba, as well as all human rights defenders in the Philippines, and ensure
in all circumstances that they are able to carry out their legitimate
activities without any hindrance and fear of reprisals;
 
iii. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration
on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United
Nations on December 9, 1998, especially its Articles 1 and 12.2;
 
iv. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by the Philippines.

Addresses
 
Authorities in the United
States of America:
 
·    
H.E. Donald Trump, President
of the United States of America, Email: https://www.whitehouse.gov/contact
, Twitter: @realDonaldTrump
·    
H.E. John Sullivan, Acting
Secretary of State of the USA, Email: https://register.state.gov/contactus/,
Twitter: @StateDept
·    
Ms. Kirstjen M. Nielsen,
Secretary, Department of Homeland Security of the USA, Email: DHSSecretary@hq.dhs.gov,
Twitter: @DHSgov
·    
Mr. Kevin K. McAleenan,
Commissioner of U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Email: https://help.cbp.gov/app/ask,
Twitter: @CBP_McAleenan
·    
H.E. Sung Y. Kim, Ambassador,
Embassy of the United States of America to the Philippines, Fax: (+623)
301-2017, Email: ACSInfoManila@state.gov, Twitter:
@USAmbManila
·    
Mr. Matthew Lussenhop, Deputy Chief of
Mission, US
Embassy in Brussels, Fax: +32 2 811-4500, Twitter: @usembbrussels 
·    
Mr. Theodore. Allegra, Deputy Permanent Representative,
Permanent Mission of the United States of America to the United Nations Office
in Geneva, 
Fax: +41 22 749 48 80, Email: GenevaUSmission@state.gov
 
Authorities in the Philippines:

 
·    
H.E. Rodrigo Duterte, President of the
Republic of the Philippines, Fax: (+632) 742-1641 / 929-3968, E-mail:
op@president.gov.ph or send message through http://president.gov.ph/contact-us/
·    
Mr. Alan Peter Cayetano, Secretary,
Department of Foreign Affairs of the Philippines, Email: osec@dfa.gov.ph, Twitter: @alanpcayetano
·    
Hon. Menardo Guevarra, Secretary,
Department of Justice of the Philippines, Fax: (+632) 521-1614, Email:
communications@doj.gov.ph
·    
Hon. Jose Luis Martin Gascon, Chairperson,
Commission on Human Rights of the Philippines, Fax: (+632) 929 0102, Email:
chairgascon.chr@gmail.com
·    
H.E. Mr. Evan P. Garcia, Ambassador,
Permanent Mission of the Philippines to the United Nations Office in Geneva,
Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 716 19 32 Email: mission@genevapm.ph
·    
Embassy of the Philippines in Brussels,
Belgium, Fax: (+32) 02 345 64 25, E-mail: brusselspe@gmail.com
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the United States of America
and the Philippines located in your country.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, April 26, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the
Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme is to prevent or remedy
situations of repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both
members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory,
call the emergency line:
• E-mail:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
• Tel and fax OMCT + 41
(0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
• Tel and fax FIDH: +
33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 