The UN Human Rights Council should urgently address the issue of increasing obstacles to NGOs access to funding!
March  8, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2013 / MarchThe UN Human Rights Council should urgently address the issue of increasing obstacles to NGOs access to funding!






IMPACT!
  In a very positive move, on March 21, 2013, the United Nations (UN) Human
  Rights Council adopted by consensus - despite last minute hostile amendments
  proposed by China, Cuba, Egypt and the Russian Federation - an unprecedented
  resolution, introduced by Norway and co-sponsored by 70 States, affirming
  that “no law should criminalise or de-legitimise activities in defence of
  human rights on account of the origin of funding”. By doing so, the Council gave a strong response to the increasing
  trend of curtailing - when not criminalizing - the activities of human rights
  defenders by limiting their right to access funding, especially when they
  come from foreign countries (for more information see below). 




As
Ms. Navi Pillay, UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, highlighted
in her opening
statement to the 22nd
regular session of the United Nations Human Rights
Council, it remains “a matter of great concern that so many State
authorities continue to ignore or repress civil society organizations, human
rights defenders and the media”, those “heroes of our time”.
 
All over the world, human
rights defenders indeed continue to face daily
repression, being subjected to acts of harassment and intimidation, physical
attacks, arbitrary detention, judicial harassment, ill treatments or even death.
 
In the Annual
Report 2013, the first authoritative study on restrictions on human rights
defenders’ access to funding which was released in parallel to the session of
the Human Rights Council on 28th February, the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders demonstrates how NGOs’
access to funding, in particular foreign funding, is increasingly being hindered
by governments around the world. States resort to restrictive laws, smear campaigns and judicial
harassment against human rights defenders as a way to stifle any
criticism, such as in the Russian Federation, Ethiopia,
Belarus, Egypt, India or Bangladesh, among others.
 
“The UN Human Rights Council -
notably through the resolution that is being presented by Norway on the issue -
should call for stronger protection for those actors for change and the
guarantors of a free society”, said Mr.
Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General. "As restrictions to
access to funding clearly aim at silencing human rights defenders and by the
same token the voice of victims of human rights violations, it is of vital importance that the
Council addresses this as a matter of priority", he added.
 
This call was echoed by Ms. Kyung-wha
Kang, Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights, in the opening
remarks she delivered at the high level
panel discussion that was
organised in the UN on the occasion of the
launch of the Annual Report 2013 of the Observatory: "This resolution is an
opportunity for the Council to go one step further and take a strong stand on
this important issue".                        
 


During this side
event, 
human rights defenders from the Russian Federation, Bangladesh and Egypt contributed
to a better understanding of the concrete impact of such restrictions to access
to funding and their effect on human rights defenders in all regions of the
world.                       
 
Mr. Maina
Kiai,
UN Special Rapporteur on the Rights to Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and of
Association, and Ms. Margaret Sekaggya, UN Special
Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights Defenders, also addressed the panel
through video recordings:
 Maina Kiai's oral intervention / Launch of OBS report 2013 / UN Side-Event 28th Feb 2013 from OMCT / SOS-Torture Network on Vimeo.
 Margaret Sekaggya's oral intervention / Launch of OBS report 2013 / UN Side-Event 28th Feb 2013 from OMCT / SOS-Torture Network on Vimeo.




IMPACT!
  In a very positive move, on March 21, 2013, the United Nations (UN) Human
  Rights Council adopted by consensus - despite last minute hostile amendments
  proposed by China, Cuba, Egypt and the Russian Federation - an unprecedented
  resolution, introduced by Norway and co-sponsored by 70 States, affirming
  that “no law should criminalise or de-legitimise activities in defence of
  human rights on account of the origin of funding”. By doing so, the Council gave a strong response to the increasing
  trend of curtailing - when not criminalizing - the activities of human rights
  defenders by limiting their right to access funding, especially when they
  come from foreign countries. 




“We
welcome the adoption of this important resolution, through which the UN Human
Rights Council is calling for stronger protection for those actors for change
and the guarantors of a free society”, said Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General.
“States have the responsibility to abide
by the resolution and ensure that human rights NGOs are enabled to access
funding, as such restrictions clearly aim at silencing them”, he added.
 
This
resolution confirms and reinforces the previous conclusions of UN human rights
mechanisms affirming the non-compliance of restrictive and repressive practices
and laws with international human rights law. 
 
All
relevant UN mechanisms should now build on this text to enhance the protection
of human rights defenders targeted by legislations and practices curtailing
their legitimate activities in many countries. 
 



The 70 cross-regional co-sponsors
  of the resolution are the following: Albania,
  Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
  Herzegovina, Benin, Bulgaria, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte
  d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt, Estonia,
  Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
  Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
  Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Morocco, The Netherlands,
  Republic of Moldova, Montenegro, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Paraguay, Peru,
  Poland, Portugal, Romania, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, State of
  Palestine, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
  Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
  Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay.



 
For
more information, see also http://www.omct.org/human-rights-defenders/urgent-interventions/2013/03/d22194/ 