Kyrgyzstan:  Kyrgyzstan: threats and harassment of witness to a crime
April 10, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2000 / AprilKyrgyzstan: Kyrgyzstan: threats and harassment of witness to a crimeKyrgyzstan: threats and harassment of witness to a crime  Case KGZ 100400  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Kyrgyzstan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source of the threats and harassment of a witness to a crime committed by policemen in Kyrgyzstan.  According to the information received, Ms. Nadejda Nikolaevna Maslovets, the only witness to a crime involving the death of an underage Skromnov Sergei in February 27, 1998, is being subjected to threats, harassment and an attack.    The case in connection with this harassment is that of Skromnov Sergei who, on February 27, 1998, at about 21:00,  was beaten up with truncheons and then pushed into vehicle "Gazel" by three policemen and taken off in an unknown direction.  According to the information received, these three officers then tortured the boy and murdered him.  Ms. Nadejda Nikolaevna Maslovets is the only witness to this crime.  According to the information, she knew one of the participants of the crime, Baikov E., as he lives on the same street as her.  During the trial on Baikov, she also recognized another perpetrator, Beishembiev D., a sergeant major of ROVD (district militia department) of Leninski district of Bishkek.  On December 9, 1999, she recognized Moldoshev K., captain of Leninski ROVD as the third policeman who carried out the attack on Skromnov Sergei.  From the beginning of the case against these three men, it is reported that she has been repeatedly visited at home by unknown persons.  She was threatened with physical injury and offered money to persuade her to stop assisting the investigation of the murder.  Such visits have continued for the last two years.    From January 26, 2000, these visits continue to be renewed each week.  A car with black windows, with no registration number is reportedly often in front of her house with two or three men inside.  On March 11, 2000, about 9:00pm, it is reported that three persons arrived in the same car and told her they wanted to talk to her.  According to the information, she refused, told them to stop their visits and began to lock the gates.  Then, one of them managed to push through and hit her chest causing her to fall down.  Her two dogs attacked causing them to flee.  She required medical attention for the injuries sustained in this attack.  According to the information, she has repeatedly applied to the prosecution office of Alamedin district of Bishkek, Chui regional prosecution office, Prosecution General, Interior and National Security ministries to no avail.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Kyrgyzstan urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Nadejda Nikolaevna Maslovets; ii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the the harassment and attack on Ms. Nadejda Nikolaevna Maslovets, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; iii.	ensure that those persons responsible for the alleged torture and death of Skromnov Sergei are brought before a civil and competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law and that the investigation of this crime is not impeded in any way; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  President  of  Kyrgyz Republic Askar Akayev Fax :  996 (312) 21 86 27  Premier Amangeldy Muraliev, Fax : 996 (312)  66 13 82  Geneva, April 10, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 