Bangladesh:  Further acts of administrative and judicial harassment against Odhikar and its Secretary, Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan
May 27, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2016 / MayBangladesh: Further acts of administrative and judicial harassment against Odhikar and its Secretary, Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan

New
information
BGD 001 / 0813 / OBS 074.7
Administrative and judicial harassment / 
Obstacles to freedom of association
Bangladesh
May 27, 2016
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
and FIDH, requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Bangladesh.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed with great concern
about further acts of administrative and judicial harassment against the human
rights non-governmental organisation Odhikar and its Secretary, Mr. Adilur
Rahman Khan, in a
further attempt to sanction and silence their human rights activities[1]. 
According to the information received, on May 25,
2016, Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan,
also a member of OMCT General Assembly, was summoned to Bangladesh’s
Anti-Corruption Commission (ACC), where he was interrogated by ACC Deputy Director Jalal Uddin Ahammad regarding
a complaint initiated by the ACC against Odhikar for alleged “money
laundering”.
 
On May 22,
2016, Odhikar had received a notice from the ACC under sections 19 and 20 of
the ACC Act 2004, requesting Mr. Adilur
Rahman Khan to appear before Mr. Jalal Uddin Ahammad over allegations of “money
laundering”. The notice, dated May 18, 2016, referred to 97’000 EUR that were
transferred to Odhikar’s bank account by the European Union (EU) in July 2013,
in the framework of a EU-sponsored project called “Education on the
Convention against Torture and OPCAT Awareness Programme in Bangladesh”, run by Odhikar and approved by the NGO
Affairs Bureau (NGOAB) of the Government of Bangladesh.

During the meeting with Mr. Jalal Uddin
Ahammad, Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan categorically denied the
allegations of money laundering against Odhikar, and submitted documents
proving that the funds referred to by the ACC had been transferred and handled
in accordance with the law[2].
 
In July
2013, 97,501.07 EUR were credited to Odhikar’s bank account as the instalment
for the second year of its EU-sponsored project, with the permission of NGOAB.
However, after Odhikar made some initial withdrawals to implement the project
activities, the NGOAB revoked its approval for the project, and the remaining
amount in Odhikar’s account was frozen, preventing Odhikar from fully
implementing the project activities.
 
Mr. Jalal Uddin Ahammad requested Mr. Khan to
also submit a bank statement
of Odhikar’s account where the remainder of the EU money is frozen, as well as
the audit report of the EU funded project. The ACC Deputy Director stated that the submission of these documents would
result in a “quick resolution” of this matter, despite the fact that these
documents had already been
submitted by Odhikar to the NGOAB.
 
The Observatory recalls that although the ACC has been
investigating this matter since 2013, neither Odhikar nor Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan have received any copy of the letter of allegation
outlining the grounds for the investigation.
 
The Observatory strongly condemns these new and
baseless acts of administrative and judicial harassment against Odhikar and Mr.
Adilur Rahman Khan, which take
place in an already repressive context for civil society in Bangladesh.
 
The
Observatory calls on the European Union, and the international community in
general, to intervene on Odhikar’s behalf in this matter. More generally, the
international community must urge the authorities of Bangladesh to take
concrete steps to end the harassment against human rights defenders in the
country, including by repealing or amending repressive laws affecting their
work such as the Foreign Donations
(Voluntary Activities) Regulation Bill 2015[3].
 
Background information:
 
Odhikar has
been under extreme pressure since August 2013, when the authorities arrested
Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan on
trumped up charges in relation
to a fact-finding report issued by Odhikar on the killing of civilians by
security forces in May 2013. 
 
Since then,
attacks and harassment against Odhikar have been ongoing, including judicial
harassment against both Mr. Khan and Mr. Nasiruddin Elan, Odhikar
Director, as well as the surveillance and repression of Odhikar, its staff, and
their relatives.
 
Odhikar is
also facing great difficulties to implement its activities, since all of its
bank accounts have been frozen and it has been forbidden from receiving foreign
funding.
 
In addition, on August 2, 2015, the Media and Public
Relations wing of the Police Headquarters in Dhaka issued a statement
condemning newspaper reports on extrajudicial killings, which cited Odhikar and
BAMAK, another NGO. The Press Release, which was entitled "Police did
not commit extrajudicial killings. Statements of Odhikar and BAMAK are
unlawful; only subversive campaigns", declared that the statements
made by the two organisations “contravene the existing laws of Bangladesh,
which is synonymous to challenging Rule of Law and the judicial system”. The
Police Press Release further stated that questioning the activities of the
police threatens the reputation of the police and amounts to defamation and a
criminal act, and may be considered as a subversive activity[4].
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Bangladesh, urging
them to:
 
i.
Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of
Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan, all Odhikar members, their relatives as well as of all
human rights defenders in Bangladesh;
 
ii. Put an
end to any kind of harassment - including at the administrative and judicial
level - against Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan, all members of Odhikar, their relatives
as well as all human rights defenders in Bangladesh;
 
iii. Ensure
in all circumstances that Odhikar as well as all human rights defenders in
Bangladesh are able to carry out their legitimate activities without any
hindrance and fear of reprisals;
 
iv. Withdraw
the Foreign Donations (Voluntary Activities)
Regulation Bill 2015;
 
v. Conform
with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by
the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially its Articles 1 and 12.2;
 
vi. Ensure
in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Bangladesh.
 
Addresses:
 
·       Ms.
Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister of Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2
8113243, Email: pm@pmo.gov.bd 
·       Professor
Dr. Gowher Rizvi, Adviser to the Prime Minister (International Affairs),
Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 9111312 Email: advinternational@pmo.gov.bd 
·       Mr.
Asaduzzaman Khan, State Minister for Home Affairs of Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2
9515541. Email: stateminister@mha.gov.bd 
·       Mr.
Anisul Huq, Minister for Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs of
Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 7168557. Email: minoflaw@law.com 
·       Md.
Shahriar Alam, State Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh. Fax: +880
2 9562188. Email: fm@mofa.gov.bd 
·       Mr.
Mahbubey Alam, Attorney General for Bangladesh, Email: adv_mahbubey@yahoo.com 
·       H.E.
Mr. Abdul Hannan, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 46 16,
E-mail: mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.int
·       Embassy
of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 646 59
98; Email: bdootbrussels@skynet.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or
embassies of Bangladesh in your respective country as well as to the EU
diplomatic missions or embassies in Bangladesh.



[1] Odhikar
is a prominent human rights NGO that since its inception in 1994 has been
showing its commitments towards the universality of human rights. Activities of
Odhikar include reporting, advocacy and fact-finding activities on violations
considered “sensitive” - such as disappearances, torture, political violence,
etc.


[2] Such
documents included the grant contract signed between Odhikar and
the EU in December 2010 with respect to the above-mentioned two-year project,
and the approval from the NGOAB allowing Odhikar to implement the project and
to spend the money during the project period.


[3] For more details on the Foreign Donations (Voluntary Activities)
Regulation Bill 2015, see Observatory Press Release, October 16, 2015.


[4] See Observatory Press Release, August 4, 2015. 