Myanmar (ex-Burma):  Recent development in the investigation of Mr. Soe Moe Tun’s murder
January 19, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Myanmar (ex-Burma) / 2017 / JanuaryMyanmar (ex-Burma): Recent development in the investigation of Mr. Soe Moe Tun’s murder





New information
MMR 002 / 1216 / OBS 109.1
Killing
Burma
January 19, 2017
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has
received new information and requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Burma. 
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about a recent
development in the investigation of Mr. Soe
Moe Tun’s murder. Mr. Soe Moe Tun, who was murdered on December 13, 2016,
was a journalist with the Eleven Media Group, a company that owns several media
outlets in Burma, including the Daily
Eleven newspaper. Mr. Soe Moe Tun was known for his investigative work on
illegal logging and timber smuggling in several areas of Sagaing Region,
including Monywa and Sagaing Townships.
 
According to the information received, on January 16, 2017, two suspects
under investigation were released from police custody. The two suspects, the
manager and supervisor of karaoke bar Blue Sky KTV, were among the last people
Mr. Soe Moe Tun had been in contact with before he was killed. The two suspects
were arrested on December 19, 2016. A third suspect, a driver, arrested on
January 2, 2017, remains in custody.
 
The police have also filed a request with the Ministry of Transport and
Communications to investigate phone numbers contacted and conversation records
in Mr. Soe Moe Tun’s phone.
 
The Observatory urges the authorities to ensure a thorough, impartial, and
transparent investigation into the murder of Mr. Soe Moe Tun is carried out, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them
before an independent tribunal, and sanction them as provided by the law.
 
The Observatory expresses its deepest concern over the unsafe
environment for human rights defenders in Burma, in particular the ongoing
impunity in the case of the murder of Karen woman human rights defender Ms. Chit
Pandaing, better known as “Eh Paw Tel”[1].
 
Background information:
 
On the morning of December 13, 2016, the body of Mr. Soe Moe Tun was
found on the side of Pyidaungsu Road near the Monywa golf course in Monywa,
Sagaing Region. Bruises, wounds on his head, and an apparently fractured skull
lead police to believe Mr. Soe Moe Tun was beaten to death with a blunt object.
 
Shortly before his death, on December 7, 2016, Mr. Soe Moe Tun had
written a Facebook post that included a list of individuals who were
allegedly tied to the illegal timber trade in Sagaing Region.
 
On December 13, 2016, police in Monywa opened a murder investigation
into Mr. Soe Moe Tun’s death. Preliminary evidence gathered by the police
indicated that the killing was intentional and premeditated, and may have
involved at least two people.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Burma asking them to:
 
i. Carry out an immediate, thorough, impartial, and transparent
investigation into the murder of Mr. Soe
Moe Tun in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before an
independent tribunal, and sanction them as provided by the law;
 
ii. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological
integrity of all human rights defenders in Burma;
 
iii. Comply with all the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on December 9,
1998, in particular with its Articles 1 and 12.2;
 
iv. Guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
U Htin
Kyaw, President; Fax: +95 1 652 624
·    
Lt Gen
Kyaw Swe, Minister for Home Affairs; Fax: +95 67 412 439; Email: mohamyanmar@gmail.com
·    
Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi, Minister of Foreign Affairs; Fax: +95 67 412396
·    
U Win
Mra, Chairman of the Myanmar National Human Rights Commission; Email: chmyanmarnhrc@gmail.com
·    
U Tun Tun
Oo, Union Attorney General; Email: ago.h.o@mptmail.net.mm
·    
Maj Gen
Zaw Win, Director General, Myanmar Police Force, Ministry of Home Affairs, Fax:
+95 67 412006; Email: mpfserver@gmail.com
·    
HE
Mr. Htin Lynn, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent
Representative to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland; Fax: +41 22 732 89
19, +41 22 732 73 77; Email: mission@myanmargeneva.org
·     Embassy of Myanmar in Brussels, Belgium; Fax: +32 2
705 50 48; Email: mebrussels@skynet.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic representations of Burma in your
respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, January 19, 2017
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the
Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The objective of this
programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European
Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil
society.




[1]
See the Observatory Urgent Appeal MMR 001/1216/OBS 108 published on December
15, 2016. 