Turkey:  Open Letter to Mr. Abdullah Gül, President  and Mr. Sadullah Ergin, Minister of Justice
February 24, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2011 / FebruaryTurkey: Open Letter to Mr. Abdullah Gül, President  and Mr. Sadullah Ergin, Minister of JusticeOpen Letter to the President of Turkey3 pages / 64 KB

OPEN LETTER TO THE 
AUTHORITIES - THE OBSERVATORY
Open Letter to Mr. Abdullah Gül, President
and Mr. Sadullah Ergin, Minister of Justice
Republic of Turkey
Paris-Geneva, February 24, 2011
Re: Call for the release and the end of judicial harassment against 
four IHD members.
Your Excellencies, 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), expresses its deepest concern about the 
prolonged pre-trial detention and judicial harassment against Mr. 
Muharrem Erbey, General Vice-President of the Human Rights Association (İnsan Haklari Derneği - İHD) and President of its Diyarbakır province branch, Mr. 
Arslan Özdemir and Ms. Roza Erdede[1], İHD members in Diyarbakırand, Ms. Vetha Aydın, President of İHD's Siirt province branch[2]. 
The Observatory recalls that the four human rights defenders were 
arrested by the Anti-Terror Units as part of an operation launched in 11 provinces of Turkey between the end of 2009 and April 2010 to dismantle a so-called 
terrorist network - the Kurdish Communities Union (KCK) - an organisation said 
to be the “urban branch” of the armed Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK). The four 
defenders have been charged of “being a member of an illegal organisation” pursuant to Article 314 
of the Criminal Code, with reference to Article 220/6 of the Criminal Code in 
the Law No. 5237 and are facing a minimum sentence of 7,5 to 15 years of prison. 

The Observatory conducted a fact-finding mission in Turkey from 
October 16 to 22, 2010. Ms. Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH President, personally headed 
the delegation, and had the honour to meet your Excellency, Mr. Sadullah Ergin. The 
objectives of this visit were to express our solidarity with Mr. Erbey and other İHD members at the opening of their trial before the Diyarbakır Special Heavy 
Penal Court on October 18, 2010, to meet state officials and civil society representatives and to collect information on the circumstances and reasons of the 
arrests targeting several human rights defenders, notably İHD 
members.
We would like to share with you some of our preliminary findings on 
the conduct of the investigation and prosecution of Messrs. Erbey and Özdimir, 
Ms. Erdede and Ms. Aydın since we believe that the accusation of membership to a terrorist organisation is 
baseless.
In relation to Mr. Erbey, the minutes made during his interrogation 
on December 25, 2009 by the prosecution show that he was arrested for his 
legitimate human rights work. It appears that that the charges were notably 
based on his participation in a workshop in Diyarbakır in September 2009 on 
constitutional amendments aimed at ensuring a greater respect of minorities' 
rights, on his speeches on Kurdish rights made before parliaments in Belgium, 
Sweden and England, and on his attendance to the “Kurdish Film Festival” in 
Italy in 2009. In addition, in contradiction with the right of the defence, 
lawyers representing Messrs. Erbey and Özdimir were only given access to the criminal file 
six months after the arrest of their clients.
It is also alleged that Ms. Vetha Aydın was charged in relation to 
meetings she attended and press statements she made as part of her human rights 
work. Furthermore, several IHD premises were illegally searched, notably on 
December 24, 2009 at İHD's Diyarbakır province branch and on March 16, 2010 at İHD's Siirt 
province branch.
The Observatory is deeply concerned that Mr. Erbey, Ms. Aydın, Mr. Özdemir and Ms. Erdede are being prosecuted 
under terrorism law since their human rights activities should not be considered 
as crimes. In that regard, the Observatory would like to recall Article 1 of the 
United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the General 
Assembly on December 9, 1998, which states that “everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the 
protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the 
national and international levels”.
The work and commitment of Mr. Erbey, Ms. Aydın, Mr. Özdemir and Ms. 
Erdede towards the promotion and protection of human rights and peace in Turkey 
is unquestionable and as human rights defenders, the State of Turkey should 
“take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent 
authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against 
any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, 
pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate 
exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration” in conformity 
with Article 12.2 of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders.
We appraise the fact that freedom of expression has greatly improved 
in Turkey over the past years and that critical and open debate in the media and 
public on topics deemed sensitive have increased. However, the Observatory 
considers that the prosecution of human rights defenders for their human rights 
work, including the exercise of their freedom of expression, contravene the 
international obligations of Turkey and notably the International Covenant and 
Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).
Due to the excessive duration of the pre-trial detention of Mr. 
Erbey, Ms. Aydın, Mr. Özdemir and Ms. Erdede and the elements of the case which 
show that their detention is arbitrary, the Observatory considers that the 
continuing detention and judicial harassment against the four human rights 
defenders also violate international and regional commitments binding the 
Republic of Turkey and therefore urges for their immediate provisional 
release.
In that regard, the Observatory calls your Excellencies to ensure the 
respect and protection of the right to liberty and security, the right to 
a fair and public hearing within a reasonable time by an independent 
and impartial tribunal established by law, the right to the presumption of 
innocence, the right to defence and the right to freedoms of thought and 
expression of the above mentioned defenders in compliance with the ECHR and the 
ICCPR.
More generally,  the Observatory calls your 
Excellencies to ensure that human rights defenders in the Republic of Turkey do 
not face any act of harassment, so as to comply with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders as well as to ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights 
and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international and regional human 
rights instruments ratified by the Republic of Turkey. 
The Observatory respectfully thanks your Excellencies for their 
attention in this matter and expresses its sincere hope that your Excellencies 
will take these considerations into account.
Yours sincerely,
                 Souhayr 
BELHASSEN                              
Eric SOTTAS
                   FIDH 
President                          OMCT 
Secretary General
 




[1]              Messrs Muharrem Erbey and Arslan Özdemir are remanded into custody since 
23 December 2009. Ms. Roza Erdede is remanded into custody since April 2010. See 
the Observatory's Press Release, December 29, 2009.

[2]              Ms. Vetha Aydın was 
arbitrarily arrested on March 16, 2010 by the Anti-Terror Unit of the police 
together with Mr. Abdullah Gürgen, board member İHD's Siirt province branch. On March 17, 2010, Mr. Abdullah Gürgen 
was released from the Siirt police headquarters at around 2 pm. See the 
Observatory's TUR 001 / 0310 / OBS 040. 