Angola:  From Theory to Practice - It's Time to Guarantee the Capacity of Human Rights Defenders to Act
May 22, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Angola / 2013 / MayAngola: From Theory to Practice - It's Time to Guarantee the Capacity of Human Rights Defenders to ActANGOLA: Da Teoria à Prática - É hora de garantir a capacidade de atuação dos defensores dos direitos humanos2 pages / 48 KB 
Preliminary
findings of a fact-finding mission on the
situation of human rights defenders
 
 
Paris-Geneva, May 22, 2013. The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human
Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), carried out a
fact-finding mission in Angola, from April 21 to May 1, 2013, to analyse the
context in which human rights defenders are operating in the country. The
mission delegation met with, amongst others, members of human rights NGOs,
journalists, lawyers, artists, along with representatives of national
authorities, political parties and foreign diplomatic missions. The first-hand
testimonies gathered during the mission and the analysis thereof reveal an
environment marked by the persistence of hindrances to the ability of human
rights defenders to carry out their activities freely, despite an avowed
commitment from the Angolan authorities to strengthen dialogue and cooperation
with civil society on human rights issues.
 
10 years after the end of a 30-year long
war which claimed one million lives and left one-third of the population
displaced, while Angola is benefiting from a fruitful oil exploitation and
growing political influence on the regional and international scenes and
despite the recent adoption of legal and institutional reforms to guarantee
respect of fundamental rights and freedoms, multiple human rights challenges
are yet to be addressed to laying the foundations of democracy and the rule of
law in the country. In a socio-political context still marked by the prevalence
of widespread poverty, endemic corruption and marginalisation of the
opposition, Angolan human rights defenders are facing different kinds of
obstacles preventing them from monitoring, documenting and denouncing human
rights abuses in a satisfactory manner. 
 
The mission gathered numerous testimonies
from human rights defenders, including journalists who are systematically
subjected to judicial and administrative harassment, threats and various forms
of restrictions to their freedom of association, expression and/or assembly, in
particular when they raise “sensitive” concerns on issues such as governance,
access to justice, corruption, forced evictions, exploitation of natural
resources or the situation in the Cabinda province. The mission delegation also
collected information on the evolution of and difficulties faced by the youth
movement that emerged in early 2011, calling for the end of a political system
based on patronage, inequalities and lack of transparency. Structural
impediments to the work of human rights defenders were also raised during the
mission. The NGO registration process remains complex, costly and opaque and
the NGO sector is crippled by a lack of human resources and financial
sustainability. 
 
Furthermore, according to the information
collected during the mission, the judiciary is perceived as an institution
subservient to political direction, influence and pressure, that does not
effectively play its critical role in the defence, protection and enforcement
of fundamental rights and freedoms. This bodes ill for the proper and effective
operation of human rights defenders.
 
“Angola is facing tremendous
human rights challenges which require the involvement of all relevant actors.
Human rights activists have a key role to play in the process to strengthen
democracy and the rule of law. Yet, despite the declared willingness of Angolan
authorities to abide by their national and international human rights
commitments, information collected during our mission depicts an environment
marked by a persistent distrust of dissenting voices, a context we consider to
be detrimental to the building up of a strong and sustainable civil society”, declared Justice Thomas Masuku, who
headed the mission delegation. 
 
The Observatory will soon release a full
mission report on the situation on human rights defenders in Angola with
specific recommendations to the authorities, aimed at guaranteeing the rights
of human rights defenders in the country. 