Cambodia:  New joint ingo letter on LANGO
July  6, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Cambodia / 2015 / JulyCambodia: New joint ingo letter on LANGONew joint INGO letter on LANGOingoletter.pdf

H.E.
Hun Sen
Prime
Minister
Royal
Government of Cambodia
Phnom
Penh, Cambodia
 
6
July 2015
 
Re:
Law on Associations and Non-Governmental Organizations
 
Dear
Prime Minister Hun Sen,
 
We,
the undersigned international non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and membership
organizations call on the government of Cambodia to immediately withdraw the
draft Law on Associations and Non-Governmental Organizations (LANGO) submitted
before the National Assembly and apparently scheduled for a vote on 10 July
2015. The government has failed to engage in serious and meaningful
consultations with affected groups or the wider public. At the National
Assembly, the draft law has been subject only to a pro-forma review by Assembly commissions
 controlled  by  the  governing  Cambodian
 People’s  Party (CPP), continuing to ignore civil society concerns about
the unnecessary restrictions it imposes and its potential for arbitrary
implementation against critical groups and individuals. A law affecting
fundamental rights should not be given so cursory consideration.
 
This
legislation, if adopted, would seriously damage the ability of many domestic and
international associations and NGOs, as well as community-based advocacy movements,
to work effectively in Cambodia. The law would give the Interior, Foreign
Affairs and other ministries sweeping, arbitrary powers to shut down existing
domestic and foreign membership groups and staffed organizations, unchecked
through judicial review, and to prohibit the creation of new ones, while criminalizing
activities by non-registered groups. 
 
Furthermore,
the restrictions on the right to association contained in LANGO go beyond the
permissible limitations allowed by international human rights law and are
unnecessary for any legitimate purpose. Legislation already in force in Cambodia
is fully sufficient to appropriately regulate the activities of NGOs and other
associations and to allow prosecution where criminal acts have been committed. 
 
Recent
events and the manner in which the LANGO is now being rushed through the
National Assembly on an expedited schedule have heightened our concern that the
almost certain consequence will be to impose new draconian and impermissibly
excessive restrictions on the exercise of the rights to freedom of peaceful
assembly, association, expression and opinion –rights safeguarded under the
Constitution of Cambodia and the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights (ICCPR), to which Cambodia is a party. 
 
In a
22 June 2015 letter to the National Assembly, we have detailed our concerns about
the key departures from international human rights standards in the draft LANGO
text presented to the Council of Ministers on 5 June and about the government’s
 failure  to meaningfully consult with civil society about its provisions.
We greatly regret that this same text, with only a few fairly inconsequential
changes, was forwarded to the National Assembly. 
 
Initially,
a CPP member of the National Assembly was reported as saying there would be a
parliamentary consultation with civil society on the draft in early August. The
CPP then announced such a consultation would happen on 10 July. It has since
been re-scheduled again, with the CPP saying the consultation will happen on 8
July, and announcing at the same time that the National Assembly would meet in
an extraordinary session to consider the law on 10 July, on which date it seems
very likely that LANGO will be adopted. 
 
This
acceleration of the legislative schedule comes after security forces attempted to
suppress peaceful civil society protests against the draft law on 28, 29 and 30
June, such as preventing the launching of balloons to symbolize this opposition
and obstructing peaceful marches. The concerted efforts of the authorities to frustrate
peaceful opposition to the draft law has been accompanied by threats from
national and local government officials to use the LANGO to curtail human rights
monitoring activities once the law is in place. International groups considering
establishing themselves in Cambodia are also being deterred from doing  so
 by  the  prospect  of  the  law’s
 implementation.  
 
We
believe the two-and-a-quarter  hour  parliamentary
 “consultation”  consisting  of question and answer sessions for
civil society and others now scheduled for 8 July is not intended to be a
genuine consultation and offers little prospect of bringing the law into
compliance with international human rights standards, including those  in
 Cambodia’s  Constitution,  the  ICCPR  and  the
 United Nations Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of
Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and Protect Universally
Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (Human Rights Defenders
Declaration). As described by CPP parliamentary spokesperson Chheang Vun, the
event appears to be little more than an opportunity for the government to
reiterate its insistence on passage of the draft as  is,  and
 to  make  groups  who  oppose  the  law
 “understand”  the  need  for  it.  
 
Moreover,
the advance scheduling of the National Assembly session on 10 July leaves
little doubt as to the government's intent to go through LANGO without substantial
changes. In any case, the failure of the government to effectively consult on
the LANGO draft with relevant stakeholders throughout the process has led to an
inherently flawed draft contrary to international law.
 
If
the government of Cambodia is truly serious about the protection and promotion
of human rights, it should stop rushing down this precipitous path to the adoption
of this unnecessary and non-human rights-respecting legislation now before the
National Assembly. It should instead embark upon a path of general legal reform
to guarantee in practice the rights of which Cambodians are currently being
denied and have been denied for much too long.
 
Signed:
 
ActionAid
Amnesty
International 
ARTICLE
19 
ASEAN
Parliamentarians for Human Rights
Asia
Democracy Network (ADN)
Asian
Forum for Human Rights and Development (FORUM-ASIA)
Asian
Human Rights Commission
Asian

Network
for Free Elections (ANFREL)
Asia
Pacific Forum on Women, Law and Development
Chab
Dai 
Civil
Rights Defenders 
Dan
Church Aid / Christian Aid 
Danmission
Diakonia
Forum
Syd
Forum
on Democracy and Election (ForDE)
Global
Initiative for Economic, 
Social
and Culture Rights
Global
Witness
Heinrich
Böll Stiftung
Human
Rights Watch 
Human
Rights Now
IFEX
International
Accountability Project 
International
Commission of Jurists 
International
Service for Human Rights
Investing
in Children and their Societies (ICS)
Lawyers’
 Rights  Watch  Canada  
LICADHO
Canada 
Knights
for Peace
OT
Watch
People
in Need 
People’s
 Empower  Foundation 