China:  China: arbitrary detention and violation of personal integrity of Internet activist Mr. Yan Jun
October 28, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / China / 2003 / OctoberChina: China: arbitrary detention and violation of personal integrity of Internet activist Mr. Yan JunCase CHN 281003 Arbitrary detention / Violation of personal integrity / Freedom of expression   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the People's Republic of China.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by Human Rights in China of the arbitrary detention and violation of personal integrity of Internet activist Mr. Yan Jun in the People's Republic of China.  According to the information received, Internet activist Mr. Yan Jun was charged with subversion in closed proceedings at the Intermediate People's Court in Xi'an at 9:30 a.m. on October 24th. The details of the charge state that Mr. Yan Jun had posted criticisms of the Chinese government on the Internet.   Mr. Yan Jun is one of the province's most active dissidents. In addition to posting opposition articles on the Internet, he has also participated in open letters calling for governmental reform. He was previously imprisoned for three months in 1993. He has been detained now since April 2nd, 2003 and was formally arrested on May 9th, 2003. During his detention he has reportedly been subjected to constant beatings by other prisoners under the encouragement of the Public Security police. On June 28th his nose was broken and he was transferred to the hospital for treatment. Mr. Yan Jun has made official complaints about his treatment, but officials have not passed them along to the Procuratorate.   The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Yan Jun, especially as he has already suffered beatings resulting in physical injuries while in detention. OMCT therefore calls upon the Chinese authorities to guarantee his physical and psychological integrity at all times, and to release him in the absence of legal charges that are consistent with international law and standards. OMCT also condemns the authorities’ repression of persons seeking to enjoy their rights to the freedom of expression and opinion, notably via the gathering of information and evidence against its citizens by monitoring e-mail and Internet activity.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in the People's Republic of China, urging them to:  i.	take all measures necessary to guarantee Mr. Yan Jun’s physical and psychological integrity at all times; ii.	order his immediate release in the absence of legal charges that are consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times; iii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the allegations of ill-treatment and violations of personal integrity, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iv.	guarantee that adequate reparation is provided to Mr. Yan Jun; v.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	President Hu Jintao, People's Republic of China, c/o Embassy of the People's Republic of China; 2300 Connecticut Ave., NW, Washington, D.C., 20008, USA, Fax: +01 202 588-0032 ·	President Hu Jintao, People's Republic of China, c/o Permanent Mission of the People's Republic of China, Chemin de Surville 11, Case postale 85, 1213 Petit-Lancy 2, Genève, Suisse, Fax: +4122 7937014, E-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int ·	Minister of Justice of the People's Republic of China, Zhang Fusen Buzhang, Sifabu, 10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People's Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 65 292345 ·	Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of China, Li Zhaoxing Buzhang Waijiaobu, 2 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Beijingshi 100701, People's Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6588 2594, Email: ipc@fmprc.gov.cn ·	Ambassadeur, Sha Zukang, Mission permanente de la Rép. Pop. De Chine, Ch. De Surville, CP 85, 1213 Petit-Lancy 2, Suisse, e-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int, Fax : +4122 793.70.14  Please also write to the embassies of the People's Republic of China in your respective country.  Geneva, October 28th, 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 