Uganda:  2011 Martin Ennals Award for Human Rights Defenders winner is a gay rights activist from Uganda
May  3, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Uganda / 2011 / MayUganda: 2011 Martin Ennals Award for Human Rights Defenders winner is a gay rights activist from Uganda 
PRESS RELEASE
 Tuesday 3
May 2011
 
2011
Martin Ennals Award for Human Rights
Defenders winner is a gay rights activist from Uganda
 The
Jury of the Martin Ennals Award for Human Rights Defenders (MEA), meeting in Geneva,
selects Kasha Jacqueline Nabagesera as the Laureate for her work for LGBT rights and marginalised people in
Uganda 
Kasha Jacqueline Nabagesera, a Ugandan woman, is the
founder and Executive Director of Freedom and Roam Uganda, a main lesbian, bisexual
and transgender (LGBT) rights organisation. Kasha has had the courage to appear
on national television in Uganda, she has issued press statements on behalf of
the gay community, and spoke on several radio stations. Already in 2007 she was
harassed at the World Social Forum in Nairobi, and on many occasions afterwards
she was hackled, threatened and even attacked by people for appearing in the
media. Since then she has been shifting from house to house, afraid to stay
long in the same place. On 26 January 2011, one of her colleagues, gay activist
David Kato, was murdered following the publication of a “gay list” by the
Ugandan tabloid Rolling Stone calling for their hanging; in this black list
Kasha Jacqueline’s name also appears. The Chairman of the Jury of
the MEA, Hans Thoolen, describes the laureate as “an exceptional woman of a
rare courage, fighting under death threat for human dignity and the rights of
homosexuals and marginalised people in Africa”. With this award the
Jury wants to underline its position against the discrimination of people based
on gender or sexual orientation. 
The Ceremony
of the Martin Ennals Award will take place in the Victoria Hall of Geneva late
in the year. 
The main award of the human rights
movement. The Martin Ennals Award for Human Rights Defenders
(MEA) is a unique collaboration among ten of the world’s leading human rights
organisations to give protection to
human rights defenders worldwide. The Jury
is composed of the following NGOs: Amnesty International, Human Rights
Watch, Human Rights First, International Federation for Human Rights, World
Organisation Against Torture, Front Line, International Commission of Jurists,
German Diakonie, International Service for Human Rights and HURIDOCS. 
Previous
laureates : Muhannad Al-Hassani, Syria (2010), Emad Baghi,
Iran; Mutabar Tadjibaeva, Uzbekistan; Pierre Claver Mbonimpa, Burundi and Rajan
Hoole-Kopalasingham Sritharan, Sri Lanka; Akbar Ganji, Iran and Arnold Tsunga,
Zimbabwe; Aktham Naisse, Syria; Lida Yusupova, Russia; Alirio Uribe Muñoz,
Colombia; Jacqueline Moudeina, Chad; Peace Brigades International; Immaculée
Birhaheka, DR Congo; Natasha Kandic, Yugoslavia; Eyad El Sarraj, Palestine;
Samuel Ruiz, Mexico; Clement Nwankwo, Nigeria; Asma Jahangir, Pakistan; Harry Wu,
China. 
For
downloadable film images on the
Laureate of 2011, please go to http://vimeo.com/23160035 - the Vimeo account of True Heroes with
a password: MEA_KASHA_2011.
Patrons of the
Martin Ennals Award: Asma Jahangir, Barbara Hendricks, José Ramos-Horta, Adama
Dieng, Leandro Despouy, Louise Arbour, Robert Fulghum, Irene Khan, Theo van
Boven and Werner Lottje†. 
For further information,
please contact: Luis Marreiros, Coordinator, +41228094925
marreiros@martinennalsaward.org
or visit www.martinennalsaward.org 