Uzbekistan:  Defender of farmers' rights Azam Formonov spends 10th birthday behind bars
December 15, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Uzbekistan / 2015 / DecemberUzbekistan: Defender of farmers' rights Azam Formonov spends 10th birthday behind barsBrussels-Dublin-Paris-Geneva
 - December 15, 2015 - The Observatory for the Protection of Human 
Rights Defenders (FIDH-OMCT), FIDH member organisation "Fiery Hearts 
Club", the Association for Human Rights in Central Asia,
 the Uzbek-German Forum for Human Rights, Front Line Defenders and the 
International Partnership for Human Rights (IPHR) join Azam Formonov's 
family in wishing Azam strength for his 37th birthday which he spent 
locked up in prison. The health of Uzbek human rights defender has 
degraded remarkably during the ten years he has spent behind bars. 
Unless the international and business communities dealing with 
Uzbekistan make a decisive breakthrough in urging the government to stop
 maltreating its citizens and liberate Azam Formonov along with dozens 
of prisoners of conscience, he will languish in prison for at least 
another four years. His only crime is his activism in the association 
Human Rights Society of Uzbekistan (HRSU). Head of the regional branch of the HRSU, Mr. Azam Formonov
 has worked to defend farmers' rights. A few days before his arrest in 
April 2006, he intended to help two farmers defend their rights against a
 state-owned petrol company. Once detained, Azam Formonov was held 
incommunicado for weeks and tortured to confess to charges of extortion.
 Investigators suffocated him with gas masks, and beat him repeatedly 
with clubs for over a week. Stripped of the right to legal defense of 
his choice, he was sentenced to nine years in prison in June 2006.“We
 reiterate our urgent call to countries and corporations dealing with 
Uzbekistan to use their leverage in order to liberate Azam Formonov and 
all those who languish in prisons for having stood up for citizen's 
rights", insisted FIDH President Karim Lahidji.A
 few days ahead of his due release in April 2015, he was tried without 
legal representation for allegedly violating detention facility rules 
and sentenced to another five years and 26 days on fabricated charges. 
Azam Formonov thus joined other Uzbek prisoners of conscience, whose 
prison sentences have been arbitrarily extended on the basis of vague 
accusations of “violating prison rules”. The sentences of some human 
rights defenders have been prolonged so many times that their prison 
terms have become de facto life imprisonment. "The
 practice of extending sentences for alleged violation of prison rules 
is a severe breach of human rights. The relevant article of the Criminal
 Code must be repealed as a matter of urgency ", stressed Mutabar Tadjibaeva, President of "Fiery Hearts Club".Detained
 in a detention facility in Jaslyk known as the "death zone" for its 
extremely harsh climate and severe detention conditions, Azam Formonov 
has reported being tortured, beaten and often placed in solitary 
confinement with no heating. He suffers from severe kidney pains, that 
are exacerbated by the harsh, cold weather, and poor heating in cells in
 winter, while in summer the temperature can go up to 40 degrees, 
unbearable in tiny, overcrowded and poorly ventilated cells.“During
 his nine-years' imprisonment, Mr. Formonov has been spreading the 
information about the ill-treatment in his jail without possibility to 
appeal to any authority. In a letter written in May 2015, he described 
the terrifying conditions of detention and tortures he endured. We are 
extremely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Azam
 Formonov and other human rights defenders in jail ”, said Mary Lawlor, director of Front Line Defenders.“The
 lack of any sort of investigation into the ill-treatment of Mr. 
Formonov is completely unacceptable and evidences the catastrophic 
situation of human rights in the country”, declared Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General.Azam
 Formonov is not receiving the necessary medical treatment. His wife, 
caring for their two children alone, is permitted to visit her husband 
less often than specified in the prison rules. She spends days in the 
prison zone before being allowed to see her husband.The
 situation in Uzbekistan remains perilous for human rights defenders who
 are constantly persecuted, denied their right to a fair trial and 
imprisoned on fabricated charges. The authorities’ fierce grip on 
society eliminates any critical voices that could expose the country's 
violations of human rights: forced labour and continued child slavery in
 cotton fields, forced sterilisation of women, the absence of 
independent media and political participation, arbitrary detentions, and
 torture. The Russian human rights watchdog Human Rights Center 
"Memorial" puts the figure at 10,000, while Uzbek human rights 
organisations report more than 12,000 people detained on politically 
motivated charges.The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in 1997 by  FIDHand the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT).
 The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy to
 situations of repression against human rights defenders. 