Sri Lanka:  Warning issued by the National Secretariat for NGOs seriously undermines the freedom of association, assembly, and expression in the country
July  9, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Sri Lanka / 2014 / JulySri Lanka: Warning issued by the National Secretariat for NGOs seriously undermines the freedom of association, assembly, and expression in the countryLKA 002 / 0714 / OBS 064Obstacles to freedomof association and expressionSri LankaJuly 9, 2014The
 Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the 
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent 
intervention in the following situation in Sri Lanka.Brief description of the situation:The
 Observatory has received worrying information from reliable sources 
about obstacles to the freedom of association, assembly, and expression 
in Sri Lanka.According to the information 
received, on July 1, 2014, the National Secretariat for Non-Governmental
 Organisations (NGOs), which operates under the Ministry of Defence and 
Urban Development, issued a warning with immediate effect to all NGOs in
 the country, aiming to prevent so-called “unauthorised activities”. 
According to the National Secretariat, such activities include “press 
conferences, workshops, training for journalists, and dissemination of 
press releases which is beyond [the NGOs’] mandate”.The
 Observatory recalls that the right to freedom of association, assembly 
and expression, including the right to carry out human rights 
activitiessuch as conferences, workshops, trainings or issuing press 
releases, is a fundamental and universal right enshrined in numerous 
international treaties and standards, especially Article 22 of 
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). While 
this right may be restricted by the Government, especially for purposes 
of transparency and good governance, any restrictions must always be 
“prescribed by law”, “necessary in a democratic society”, and respect
 the primacy of the general interest and the principle of 
proportionality (Article 22.2 of ICCPR and case-law of the United 
Nations Human Rights Committee). It should be emphasised that freedom 
shall remain the rule, while restrictions should always be an exception 
admissible under the above-mentioned conditions.The
 Observatory is concerned by these attempts by the Sri Lankan Government
 to curtail the freedom of association, assembly and expression of 
human rights defenders , which seem to be aimed at undermining the 
legitimacy of their peaceful activities. The Observatoryrecalls that Sri
 Lankan authorities have the responsibility to ensure the protection of 
human rights in general and of rights related to freedoms of expression,
 assembly and association in particular.Accordingly,
 the Observatory calls upon the authorities of Sri Lanka to withdraw the
 above-mentioned notice immediately and to put an immediate end to the 
harassment against all human rights defenders and NGOs in the country, 
in conformity with international human rights standards.Action requested:Please write to the authorities in Sri Lanka, urging them to:i.
 Publicly withdraw the above-mentioned notice from the National 
Secretariat for NGOs, and affirm the legitimacy of the work of human 
rights defenders and organisations in Sri Lanka;ii.
 Ensure in all circumstances that all human rights defenders and NGOs in
 Sri Lanka are able to carry out their legitimate activities without any
 hindrance or fear of reprisals;iii.  Conform 
with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, 
adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 
1998, especially regarding the following Articles:-     
Article 1: everyone has the right, individually and in association with 
others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of 
human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international 
levels;-     Article 5 (a): For the purpose of promoting and 
protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, everyone has the 
right, individually and in association with others, at the national and 
international levels (a) To meet or assemble peacefully;-    
 Article 12.2: the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
 protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and 
in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, 
de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other 
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of 
his or her rights [...];iv.  Ensure in all 
circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in 
accordance with international human rights standards and international 
instruments ratified by Sri Lanka.Addresses:·        
 President Mahinda Rajapakse, Presidential Secretariat, C/ Office of the
 President, Temple Trees 150, Galle Road, Colombo 3, Sri Lanka, Fax: 
(+94) 11 472100 / (+94) 11 2446657 / (+94) 11 243 0590, Email: lalith@icta.lk·        
 D.M. Jayaratne, Prime Minister of Sri Lanka, No. 58, Sir Ernest De 
Silva Mawatha, Colombo 07, Sri Lanka. Fax no: (+94) 112 575454. Email: slpm@pmoffice.gov.lk·        
 Mr. Sarath Palitha Fernando, Attorney General, Attorney General's 
Department. Colombo 12, Sri Lanka. Fax: (+94) 11 2 436421.·        
 Justice Priyantha R.P. Perera, Chairman, Human Rights Commission of Sri
 Lanka. No: 165 Kynsey Road, Borella, Colombo 8, Sri Lanka. Fax: (+94) 
11 2 694924. Email: sechrc@sltnet.lk·        
 H.E. Mr. Ravinatha P. Aryasinha, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Sri 
Lanka to the United Nations in Geneva, 56 rue de Moillebeau, 1211 Geneva
 19. Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 73 49 084. E-mail: mission@lankamission.orgPlease also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Sri Lanka in your respective country.***Geneva-Paris, July 9, 2014Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.The
 Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the protection 
of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in 
their time of need.To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.orgTel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 