Chad:  Chad: the arbitrary arrest and detention of Mr. Amadou Yaille
June 13, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Chad / 2002 / JuneChad: Chad: the arbitrary arrest and detention of Mr. Amadou YailleCase Chad 130602	 Arbitrary detention / Risk of extrajudicial execution   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Chad.  Brief description of the facts  The International Secretariat of OMCT was informed by l’Association Jeunesse Anti-clivage, a member of the OMCT network, of the arrest and detention of Mr. Amadou Yaille, inhabitant of the village of Braou/Binder. As a result of reprisals against the population of the village of Braou/Binder, which had disarmed customs officials operating in their village, the following eight people were arrested:  1. BAOUTOUIN LEGAIGUE, Village chief  2. MANG-IGRE 3. KAOUSSIRI 4. BINWE BAGAMLA 5. FADANDI SEMAGUE 6. WALESSAM TCHAKREO 7. ONSALA SOGOLE 8. AMADOU YAILLE  Due to the intervention of the President of the Fianga Section of the Association Jeunesse Anti-clivage, Mr. Mbeinrou Pakamla Lazare, seven people were liberated, with the exception of Mr. Amadou Yaille. On 27 May 2002, the representatives of this NGO were able to meet with all the other defendants except for Mr. Amadou Yaille.  According to the commander of the Brigade, the order to prevent all contact with Mr. Yaille was given.  The OMCT expresses its grave concern regarding the fate of Mr Amadou Yaille.  Lacking news of his conditions, it is concerned for his physical and psychological integrity.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in the Republic of Chad, urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures in order to safeguard the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Amadou Yaille; ii.	order his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist,    bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights laws and standards.   Adresses  ·	Mr Idriss Deby, Président de la République, Présidence de la République, B.P. 74 N'Djamena, Tchad, Tél. 235 51 44 37  Fax : 235 51 45 01  ·	Mr Haroun Kabadi, Premier Ministre, Tél. 235 52 63 41 (standard) Fax : s/c Présidence, 235 51 45 01  ·	Mr Mahamat Abdoulaye, Ministre de la Justice, Fax : 235 52 21 39  Please write to the diplomatic representatives of the Republic of Chad in your country. 