Turkey:  Arbitrary arrest of human rights defenders Orhan Kemal Cengiz and Sibel Semira Hurtas
July 22, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2016 / JulyTurkey: Arbitrary arrest of human rights defenders Orhan Kemal Cengiz and Sibel Semira Hurtas

TUR 005 / 0716 / OBS 063
Arbitrary arrest
Turkey
July
22, 2016
 
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the
following situation in Turkey.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been
informed by reliable sources about the arbitrary arrest of Mr. Orhan Kemal
Cengiz, a human rights lawyer[1],
a journalist who writes on various human rights issues and founding member and
former President of the Human Rights Agenda Association (Insan Haklari
Gundemi Dernegi - HRAA)[2], and his wife, Ms. Sibel
Semira Hurtas, a journalist specializing in women's rights and State
crimes. 
 
According to the information
received, on July 21, 2016, Mr. Orhan Kemal Cengiz and Ms. Sibel Semira Hurtas
were arrested by the police at Istanbul’s Ataturk international airport, before
boarding for a plane to London to attend a conference promoted by the the Tahir
Elci Foundation and placed in police custody. Ms. Sibel Semira Hurtas was
released on the same day but Mr. Orhan Kemal Cengiz remained detained in Istanbul
Security Directorate located on Vatan Avenue. The grounds for his arrest have
not been provided. At the time of publication of this Urgent Appeal, he has not
had access to his lawyer.
 
On July 17, 2016, Mr.
Orhan Kemal Cengiz was mentioned on a blacklist of “dissent journalists” to be
detained soon, published on the pro-Government Twitter account known as Başkentçi.
 
The Observatory recalls
that the arrests take place against the backdrop of the deteriorating human
rights situation in Turkey. Since July 2015, the authorities have launched a
massive crackdown on some civil society organisations abusively depicted as
“terrorist networks”. The campaign targeted dozens of peaceful activists who
have been involved in the monitoring of human rights violations resulting from
anti-terrorism operations and who have been advocating for a peaceful
resolution of the Kurdish issue, including NGO members, lawyers, political
party representatives and journalists. 
 
Moreover, with the imposition of a State of
emergency that followed the failed military coup d’État of July 14, 2016, the
Observatory fears that the Turkish authorities will step up restrictions to
human rights and fundamental freedoms and repression against dissenting voices,
including human rights defenders.
 
The Observatory strongly
condemns the arbitrary arrest of Ms. Sibel Semira Hurtas and Mr. Orhan Kemal
Cengiz, as it seems to only aim at sanctioning their right to freedom of
expression and legitimate human rights activities. Accordingly, the Observatory
calls upon the Turkish judicial authorities to immediately and unconditionally
release Mr. Orhan Kemal Cengiz and stop the harassment against him and his
wife. 
 
Until Mr. Orhan Kemal
Cengiz is released, the Observatory further urges the Turkish authorities to
ensure that his arrest is in compliance with international law standards. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Turkey
asking them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
of Mr. Orhan Kemal Cengiz as well as of all human rights defenders in Turkey;
 
ii.     Release immediately and unconditionally Mr. Orhan Kemal Cengiz, as it seems to only aim at curtailing his human rights activities; 
 
iii.   Put an end to all acts of
harassment, including at the judicial level, against Mr. Orhan Kemal Cengiz and all human rights defenders in Turkey, so that they are able to carry out their work without
hindrance;
 
iv.    Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, in particular with its Articles 1, 6(b)(c) and 12.2;
 
v.     Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Turkey. 
 
Addresses:
 
· President of Turkey,
Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Fax: (+90 312) 525 58 31, E-mail: contact@tccb.gov.tr
·
Prime Minister of Turkey Ahmet
Davutoglu, Fax: +90 (312)
403 62 82
·
Minister of Justice of Turkey, Mr. Bekir Bozdağ, Fax: +90 (0312) 419 33
70; E-mail: info@adalet.gov.tr
· Minister of Interior of Turkey, Mr. Efkan
Ala; Fax: +90 (312) 425 61 30; Email: ozelkalem@icisleri.gov.tr
· Ambassador Izzet Selim Yenel, Diplomatic Mission of Turkey to the
European Union in Brussels, Belgium; Fax: + 32 2 511 04 50
· Ambassador
Mehmet Ferden Çarikçi, Permanent Mission of Turkey to the United Nations in
Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 734 08 59; Email: mission.turkey@ties.itu.int
 
Please also write to the diplomatic missions
or embassies of Turkey in your respective country.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, July 22, 2016
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory was created
in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The objective of this programme is to intervene to
prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. OMCT
and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the
emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals[at]fidh-omct.orgTel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1] He is one of the lawyers in the
“Tahir Elci” case, a Kurdish human rights lawyer and President of the
Diyarbakir Bar Association killed in November 2015. In February 2016, he spoke
at the Geneva Summit for Human Rights, devoting his entire speech to the memory
of Mr. Tahir Elci.


[2] The HRAA was established in 2003 in
order to work at the national and international levels on human rights
violations, especially on torture, freedom of expression, minority rights and
economic, social and cultural rights. 