Thailand:  Intimidation and judicial harassment of Ms. Thaweeporn Kummetha
November  6, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2015 / NovemberThailand: Intimidation and judicial harassment of Ms. Thaweeporn Kummetha

THA 004 / 1115 / OBS 092
Judicial harassment / Intimidation
Thailand
November 6, 2015
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Thailand.
 
Description
of the situation: 
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the acts of intimidation and judicial harassment of Ms. Thaweeporn Kummetha (a.k.a. Am), a reporter of
the online news website Prachatai and a defender of freedom of
expression and the right to access information in Thailand.
 
According to the information received, on
October 22, 2015, an unidentified person from the ruling military junta, the
National Council for Peace and Order (NCPO), called Ms. Thaweeporn on her cell
phone and summoned her for questioning on October 26, stating that he was not
satisfied with an article, which had been published by Prachatai on October 21, 2015. The Thai language article, authored
by Ms. Thaweeporn, had accompanied an infographic that listed possible actions
that could be deemed illegal under Article 112 of the Thai Criminal Code (lèse-majesté)[1].
 
After Ms. Thaweeporn declined to meet in
the absence of an official written summons, on October 26, 2015, four military
and two police officers went to Ms. Thaweeporn’s house to summon her for
questioning. It was reported that several military officers had spent much of
the day wandering around the Prachatai
offices. The next day, at around 2 pm., Ms. Thaweeporn, accompanied by Prachatai Director Ms. Chiranuch
Premchaiporn, Prachatai Managing
Editor Mr. Chuwat Rerksirisuk, and a representative from the organisation Thai
Lawyers for Human Rights (TLHR) as witnesses, was questioned about the article
and the infographic at the Signal Department of the Royal Thai Army in
Bangkok’s Bang Sue District. The meeting was attended by representatives
of the Ministry of Justice, the Department of Special Investigation (DSI), the
People’s Technological Crime Suppression Division (TCSD), four officials from
the Thai Journalist Association (TJA) and army officers.
 
The senior military officer who chaired
the meeting, which lasted for about an hour and a half, refused to reveal his
name. During the meeting, he stated that Ms. Thaweeporn should have been more
careful with the published article and infographic. The officer also threatened
her, affirming that her activities would be further monitored.
 
The Observatory expresses its deepest concern over the
acts of intimidation and judicial harassment against Ms. Thaweeporn Kummetha, which seem to merely aim at
sanctioning her human rights activities. Accordingly, the Observatory calls on
the Thai authorities to put an end to any kind of harassment – including
judicial harassment – against Ms. Thaweeporn Kummetha
and all human rights defenders in Thailand.
 
The Observatory would like to recall that this is not
the first time journalists from Prachatai
have faced such intimidation since the 2014 military coup. Mr. Tewarit
Maneechai, a reporter at Prachatai, was among several
activists and scholars summoned by the junta on June 3, 2014. He was
arbitrarily detained for three days at a military camp in Bangkok.
 
Moreover,
in May 2012, the Bangkok Criminal Court sentenced Ms. Chiranuch “Jiew”
Premchaiporn, Executive Director of the online news website Prachatai,
to one year in prison and a 30,000 baht (750 Euros) fine under Article 15 of
the Computer Crimes Act. The court reduced the sentence to an eight-month
suspended jail term and a 20,000 baht fine. The charges were the result of Ms.
Chiranuch’s failure to promptly remove comments that had been posted on the Prachatai
web board between April and November 2008, which the court considered to have
offended the monarchy.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write to the Thai authorities asking them to:
 
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical
     and psychological integrity of Ms. Thaweeporn
     Kummetha, as well as all human rights defenders in Thailand;
 
Put an end to all acts of intimidation and
     judicial harassment against Ms. Thaweeporn
     Kummetha, as well as against all human rights defenders in
     Thailand;
 
Conform with the provisions of the UN
     Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of
     the United Nations on December 9, 1998, in particular with its:
 
·              
Article
1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association
with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of
human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”
·              
Article 6(b), which foresees that “everyone has the right, individually
and in association with others, as provided for in human rights and other
applicable international instruments, freely to publish, impart or disseminate
to others views, information and knowledge on all human rights and fundamental
freedoms”;
·              
Article 6(c), which stipulates
that “everyone has the right [...] to study, discuss, form and hold opinions on
the observance, both in law and in practice, of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms and, through these and other appropriate means, to draw
public attention to those matters”;
·              
Article
12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to
ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually
and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action
as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in
the present Declaration”;
 
Ensure in all circumstances respect for
     human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international
     human rights standards and international instruments ratified by Thailand.

Addresses:


·    
Prime Minister, Gen Prayuth Chan-ocha, Government House, 1 Phitsanulok
Road, Dusit, 10300, Bangkok, THAILAND; Fax: +66 (0) 2 282 5131
·    
Minister of Interior, Gen Anupong Paochinda, Asatang Road, Ratchabophit,
10200, Bangkok, THAILAND
·    
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Don Pramudwinai, Sri Ayutthaya Building,
443 Sri Ayutthaya Road, Phaya Thai, 10400, Bangkok, THAILAND; Fax: +66 (0) 2
643 5320; Email: minister@mfa.go.th
·    
Minister of Justice, Gen Paiboon Khumchaya, 120 Chaeng Watthana Road,
Laksi, 10210, Bangkok, THAILAND; Fax: +66 (0) 2 953 0503
·    
Pol Gen Somyot Poompanmoung, Commissioner-General of the Royal Thai
Police, 1st Building, 7th Floor, Rama I Road, Pathumwan, 10330, Bangkok,
THAILAND; Fax: +66 (0) 2 251 5956 / +66 (0) 2 251 8702
·    
Ms. Amara Pongsapich, Chairperson of the National Human Rights
Commission of Thailand; 120 Chaeng Watthana Road, Laksi, 10210, Bangkok,
THAILAND; Email: help@nhrc.or.th
·    
Permanent Mission of Thailand to the United Nations in Geneva, rue
Gustave Moynier 5, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Tel: + 41 22 715 10 10; Fax: + 41
22 715 10 00 / 10 02; Email: mission.thailand@ties.itu.int
·    
Embassy of Thailand in Brussels, 2 Sq. du
Val de la Cambre, 1050 Ixelles, Belgium, Tel: + 32 2 640 68 10; Fax: + 32 2 648
30 66; Email: thaibxl@pophost.eunet.be

Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Thailand in your
respective country.




[1] Article 112 of Thailand’s Criminal Code imposes jail terms for those who
defame, insult, or threaten the King, the Queen, the Heir to the throne, or the
Regent. Persons found guilty of violating Article 112 face prison terms of
three to 15 years for each count. 