Guatemala:  OMCT Campaign: Stop the criminalisation of Claudia and Jose! #SOSClaudia #SOSJose #SOSGuatemala
April  1, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Links / Guatemala / 2019 / AprilGuatemala: OMCT Campaign: Stop the criminalisation of Claudia and Jose! #SOSClaudia #SOSJose #SOSGuatemala
Claudia and José are facing a lawsuit by Nester Vásquez,
President of the Supreme Court of Justice of Guatemala. 
 
Because together we are stronger...
Because defenders are not criminals...
 
Our mobilisation will stop their criminalisation: Take action!
 
Who are they?
 
Claudia Samayoa is the President of UDEFEGUA’s Board of
Directors and member of the OMCT Executive Committee. 
 
She is widely recognised by the defenders' community in the
Americas: her work to promote the protection of human rights defenders and her
solidarity have taken her across the whole region and beyond. As a
consequence, she has often been threatened with "paying for the
consequences" of her work defending human rights.
 
José Manuel Martínez
Cabrera is a member of the Justicia Ya collective, a leading
organisation in the work on issues related to the justice sector,
constitutional reforms and deepening of democracy.
 
 
What's their crime? 
 
Their crime is standing up to defend human rights in a
country in which doing so automatically means running risks in a context of
corruption and impunity. The accusation against them is a form of retaliation
against human rights defenders mobilising against the ongoing attacks on
democratic institutions and rule of law in Guatemala. 
 
A bill to approve an amnesty law. A bill to restrict the
right to freedom of association. The closing of space for citizen participation
and the defense of human rights. Increasing levels of violence against the
defenders. This is the context for Guatemalan defenders. But rather than
defending them, the Judiciary is unduly using criminal law against them!
 
What can you do?
 
·     
Show your support in social media using the
hashtags #SOSClaudia, #SOSJose and #SOSGuatemala
·     
Take action following our Urgent Appeal published
on March 24: Judicial harassment by the President of the SCJ against Claudia Virginia Samayoa Pineda and José Manuel Martínez Cabrera
 
Stay tuned for updates on the case and additional calls to
action!Additional resources: 
·      Joint Open Letter by 100 human rights organisations from all around the world including OMCT and dozens of member organisations of our SOS-Torture Network: Civil society organizations condemn ongoing criminalization of human rights defenders Claudia Samayoa and José Martínez 