Belarus:  Conviction of two members of Human Rights Center “Viasna” and the Head of the Human Rights Center “Legal Assistance to the Population”
March 24, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Belarus / 2017 / MarchBelarus: Conviction of two members of Human Rights Center “Viasna” and the Head of the Human Rights Center “Legal Assistance to the Population”​















URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
New information
BLR 001 / 0317 / OBS 027.1
Conviction
/ Arbitrary detention
Belarus
March 24,
2017

The Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Belarus.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the
conviction of Messrs. Leanid Sudalenka[1]
and Anatolii Poplavnyi, members
of the Gomel chapter of the Human Rights Center “Viasna” and of the arbitrary
detention of the latter, as well as of the conviction of Mr. Oleg Volchek,
Head of the Human Rights Center “Legal Assistance to the Population”[2].
 
According to the information received, on March 17, 2017 the Centralny
District Court of Gomel city found Messrs. Leanid Sudalenka and Anatolii
Poplavnyi guilty of non-compliance with the legal requirements on the
organisation and conducting of mass events under Article 23.34 of the Code of
Administrative Offences
 in connection with a
demonstration against the Presidential Decree No. 3 held on February 19, 2017
in Gomel (see background information). As a result, Mr. Leanid Sudalenka was
given a warning and Anatolii Poplavnyi was sentenced to ten days of
administrative detention.
 
Furthermore, on March 23, 2017, the Sovetskii District Court of Gomel
sentenced Anatolii Poplavnyi to five days of administrative detention for
violating the Article 23.34 of the Code of Administrative Offences in
connection with his participation to a demonstration against Presidential
Decree No. 3 on March 12, 2017, in Rogachev. 
 
Other human rights defenders have faced similar harassment for
participating in mass demonstrations that have been ongoing for more than a
month in different cities of Belarus in protest to the Presidential Decree No. 3 imposing a
tax on unemployment (see background information).
 
On March 21, 2017, the Frunzensky District Court of Minsk sentenced Mr.
Oleg Volchek to thirteen days of administrative detention under Article 23.34
of the Code of Administrative Offences for
participation in the unauthorised march protesting Presidential Decree No. 3“
on February 17, 2017 in Minsk where he monitored the assembly and provided
legal advice to participants[3].
The judgment against Mr. Oleg Volchek has been handed down in absentia.
 
The Observatory expresses its deepest concerns as
the conviction of the three human rights defenders appear to be linked to their
human rights activities opposing Presidential Decree No. 3 “On the prevention
of dependency on social aid” which in violation of international human rights
law sanctions unemployment by imposing a penalty ranging from a fee to
imprisonment on Belarusian citizens who have worked less than a certain number
of days.
 
Therefore, the Observatory urges Belarusian
authorities to immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Anatolii Poplavnyi and to put an end
to all forms of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Messrs. Anatolii Poplavnyi, Oleg Volchek and
Leanid Sudalenka .
 
Background information: 
 
In April 2015,
President of Belarus Aleksandr Lukashenka signed the Presidential Decree No. 3
“On the prevention of dependency on social aid” that obliges citizens to work more
than 183 days a year or to pay a special duty to finance government
expenditures. Non-payment or partial payment of such a levy entails
administrative responsibility in the form of a fine or administrative arrest.
Thus, stimulation of employment is sought through forced employment and the
threat of short-term imprisonment rather than through the implementation of
competitive salaries, social benefits and guarantees.
 
Throughout the country, protests have erupted to oppose the Presidential
Decree. On February 19, 2017, protests gathering nearly 4,000 citizens took
place in Gomel where members of “Viasna” Leanid Sudalenka and Anatolii
Poplavnyi were monitoring the peaceful assembly and providing citizens with
legal information. 
 
In addition, Mr. Leanid Sudalenka has drafted and submitted to
courts more than 200 complaints on behalf of citizens against the provisions of
the Decree in response to notifications that citizens received in the beginning
of the year 2017 urging them to pay the fee. Mr. Leanid Sudalenka was also
the first lawyer bringing a successful claim against the fee, setting a
precedent for approximately half a million Belarusians who received a
notification to pay a fee to the State. As a result, he was publicly named by
the authorities the “lawyer of spongers”.
 
The ongoing peaceful protests were massively repressed with hundreds of
protesters detained[4].
In Belarus, administrative detention in conditions amounting to ill-treatment
is used a tool of repression against any form of dissent[5].
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Belarus, urging them to:
 
i. Immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Anatolii Poplavnyi;
 
ii. Put an end
to any form of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Messrs. Anatolii Poplavnyi, Oleg Volchek and Leanid
Sudalenka as well as all human rights defenders in Belarus;
 
iii. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological
integrity of Messrs. Anatolii Poplavnyi,
Leanid Sudalenka and Oleg Volchek as well as all human rights
defenders in Belarus;
 
iv. Comply with all their international obligations to
respect the exercise of the citizens' right to peaceful assembly;
 
v. Comply with the
provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in
particular with its Articles 1, 2, 5 and 12.2;
 
vi. Ensure in all
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with international human rights standards and international instruments
ratified by Belarus.
 
Addresses :
 
·               
President Aliaksandr Lukashenka, Belarus, Fax: + 375 172 26 06 10 or +
375 172 22 38 72, Email: contact@president.gov.by
·               
General Prosecutor, Alexander Konyuk, Belarus, Fax: + 375 17 226 42 52
·               
Minister of Justice of Belarus, Mr. Oleg Slizhevsky, Email:
kanc@minjust.by, Fax: + 375 17 200 86 87
·               
President of the Supreme Court of Belarus, Mr. Valiantsin Alehavich
Sukala, Belarus, Email: scjustrb@pmrb.gov.by
·               
Administration of the Central District Court of Gomel, Tel/Fax: +375 232
77 68 77, Email: centr-gomel@court.by
·               
H.E. Mr. Yury Ambrazevich, Permanent Mission of Belarus to the United
Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 748 24 51. Email:
mission.belarus@ties.itu.int
·               
H.E. Mr. Aleksandr Mikhnevich, Embassy of Belarus in Brussels, Fax: + 32
2.340.02.87, Email: belgium@mfa.gov.by
 
Please also write to the diplomatic
representations of Belarus in your respective countries.
 
 ***
 
Paris-Geneva, March 24, 2017
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu , the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency
line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
Tel and fax FIDH + 33
(0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
Tel and fax OMCT + 41
(0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
 



[1]      
Leanid Sudalenka is a human rights lawyer and the head of the human rights NGO
“Justice Initiative” in Gomel.


[2]       The Human Rights Center “Legal Assistance to the Population”
is providing legal assistance to citizens on issues of labour, housing and
other civil and human rights related disputes.


[3]      
The Human Rights Center “Legal Assistance to the Population” has sent its legal
expertise related to the Decree No. 3 and its non-compliance with international
law and the Constitution of Belarus to the International Labor Organisation,
the UN Special Rapporteur on the human rights situation in Belarus Miklós
Harastzi, to diplomatic missions and international human rights
organisations. Lawyers of "Legal Assistance to the Population"
have provided citizens affected by the Decree No. 3 with more than 1000 pro
bono remote legal consultations and more than 130 people have received legal
assistance during personal consultation. 


[4]    
"Belarus crackdown: more than 200 arrested or detained in two weeks",
March 17, 2017, https://www.fidh.org/en/region/europe-central-asia/belarus/belarus-crackdown-more-than-200-arrested-or-detained-in-two-weeks


[5]    
On arbitrary “administrative” detention in Belarus and conditions of detention:

“Arbitrary Preventive Detention of Activists in Belarus”,
https://www.fidh.org/en/region/europe-central-asia/belarus/16113-release-of-a-report-arbitrary-preventive-detention-of-activists-in-belarus 