Azerbaijan:  Open Letter to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe and the Council of Europe Committee of Ministers about the increasing repression against civil society and human rights defenders in Azerbaijan
August  8, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2014 / AugustAzerbaijan: Open Letter to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe and the Council of Europe Committee of Ministers about the increasing repression against civil society and human rights defenders in Azerbaijan​













Paris-Geneva,
August 8, 2014
 
Excellencies,
 
As
Azerbaijan currently holds the Presidency of the Council of Europe Committee of
Ministers, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, joint
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), expresses its deepest
concern about the increasing repression of civil society organisations and
human rights defenders in the country, in violation of Articles 1, 3, 5, 6, 7,
10, 11, 13 and 14 of the European Convention of Human Rights. The Observatory
therefore urges the Secretary General of the Council of Europe as well as
members of the Committee of Ministers to take urgent measures about this
situation, on the basis of the Rules of Procedure of the Committee.
 
On August 8, 2014, prosecutors began
to search the apartment of Mr. Intigam Aliyev, Head of the Legal
Education Society, as well as the premises of the organisation. Before these
searches, Mr. Aliev had been summoned to the Investigation Department for
Serious Crimes of the Prosecutor General's Office as a witness. On the same
day, the Nasimi District Court sentenced Mr. Intigam Aliyev to three months'
detention under Articles 213.1 of the Criminal Code (“evasion of taxes or
contributions for compulsory social insurance in significant amount”), 308.2
(“abuse of power”), and 192.2 (“illegal business”). 
 
Also on August 8, the office of the
Institute of Reporters' Freedom and Safety (IRFS) was blocked by the police and
later searched, and documents and equipment were confiscated. On August 5, the
border guards had not permitted the Director of IRFS, Mr. Emin Huseinov,
to leave to Turkey for medical treatment.
 
Moreover, on August 6, human rights
defenders Malahat Nasibova and Ilgar Nasibov, respectively Head
and member of the Resource Center for Democracy in Nakhchivan, reported that
unknown individuals tried to open and unlock the door of their apartment,
damaging the mechanism. 
 
Previously, on August 2, 2014 in
Baku, Mr. Rasul Jafarov, an active participant in "Sing for
Democracy" and "Art for Democracy", was put on pre-trial
detention for three months pending investigation into trumped-up charges of
“tax evasion”, “illegal entrepreneurship” and “abuse of authority” (under Articles
213, 192 and 308.2 of the Penal Code respectively). On July 30, 2014, Ms. Leyla
Yunus, Director of the Institute of Peace and Democracy (IPD) and a member
of OMCT General Assembly, was charged with “treason” (Article 274 of the
Criminal Code), “large-scale fraud” (Article (178.3.2), “forgery” (Article
320), “tax evasion” (Article 213), and “illegal business” (Article 192), and
sentenced to three months pre-trial detention. Her husband, Mr. Arif Yunusov,
Head of the Conflictology Department of IPD, faces similar charges of “treason”
and “fraud”, and was also placed in pre-trial detention for three months on
August 5. The charges against Mr. Jafarov and part of the charges against Ms.
Yunus are similar to the accusations which were brought against Mr. Anar Mammadli, Chairperson of the
Election Monitoring and Democracy Studies Centre (EMDSC), and Mr. Bashir Suleymani, Executive Director of
EMDSC. Both were sentenced for “tax evasion”, “illegal entrepreneurship”, and
“abuse of authority” respectively to 5,5 years' and 3,5 years' imprisonment on
May 26, 2014 by the Court on Grave Crimes.
 
The Secretary General of the Council
of Europe met many of these human rights defenders and NGO representatives
during his recent visit to Azerbaijan this May, and they had expressed their
concern about possible negative developments.
 
In addition, over the past months, the Parliament of
Azerbaijan adopted a set of amendments to the law on NGOs, aiming at seriously
restricting NGO work. The new NGO law now provides the
authorities with additional powers for temporary suspension and permanent
banning of national and foreign NGOs, and introduces additional administrative
requirements and increased checks. Non-registered NGOs cannot be considered
recipients of grants any more. While working under non-registered grants is an
administrative offence, the courts now tend to consider such funds as personal
income in an attempt to persecute their recipients for tax evasion under
criminal law[1]. In addition, the bank
accounts of several NGOs and representatives were reportedly frozen upon
request of the General Prosecutor’s Office, including those of the Media Rights
Institute, the Democratic Institutions and Human Rights Public Union, the
Democracy and Human Rights Resource Center, the Azerbaijan Lawyers Association,
and the Center for National and International Studies.
 
All these cases are part of a
pattern of harassment and intimidation by the authorities aimed at sanctioning
and silencing civil society activists who speak up against human rights abuses
committed by the authorities in Azerbaijan. On August 7, 2014, the Council of
Europe Commissioner for Human Rights stated
that “by stifling dissent, Azerbaijan is failing to comply with its
international obligations which require safeguarding freedom of expression,
assembly and association”, and recommended that “Azerbaijan reverse the
situation”, highlighting that “a first step would be to free all those detained
because of the views they expressed”[2].
 
While it currently holds the
Presidency of the Council of Europe Committee of Ministers, Azerbaijan
therefore continues to blatantly violate most of the provisions of the European
Convention of Human Rights, the provisions of the Committee of Ministers'
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders of February 6, 2008, as well as
Resolution 1660(2009) and Recommendation 1866(2009) of the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE).
 
In light of this situation,
the Observatory requests the Secretary General of the Council of Europe and the
Council of Europe Committee of Ministers to take swift measures under the
Committee Rules of Procedure to condemn the situation of human rights defenders
and NGOs in Azerbaijan. 
 
The Observatory requests in particular:
 
- the Secretary General and
members of the Committee of Ministers to urgently convoke a Committee session
on the situation of human rights defenders in Azerbaijan, and to introduce a
draft resolution condemning the ongoing violations, as provided by Articles
1.b and 4 of the Committee Rules of Procedure; 
 
- the Secretary General to
report to the Committee of Ministers about the systematic violations of the
rights of human rights defenders and NGOs in Azerbaijan, according to Article
21.b of the Committee Rules of Procedure; 
 
- the Secretary General and
members of the Committee of Ministers to publicly condemn all the violations
against human rights defenders and NGOs in Azerbaijan.
 
In the hope that you will
be able to act expeditiously in the framework of your respective mandates, we
remain at your disposal for any further information.
 
Yours sincerely,
 
Karim LAHIDJI                                              Gerald
STABEROCK
FIDH President                                             OMCT
Secretary General



[1] For more information, see
Observatory Press Release of August 6, 2014.


[2] See http://www.coe.int/en/web/commissioner/-/concerns-over-the-situation-of-human-rights-defenders-in-azerbaijan 