Philippines: Excessive use of force to repress peaceful strike of seafarers
April 13, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2004 / AprilPhilippines: Philippines: Excessive use of force to repress peaceful strike of seafarersCase PHL 080404.ESCR Use of Excessive Force/Arbitrary Detention/Ill-treatment/Violation of  Labour Rights  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT  intervention in the following situation in Philippines.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by Kilusang  Mayo Uno - Labour Center (KMU), a member of the OMCT network, of a  number of human rights violations committed by the Maritime Police  Officers, National Police, Coast Guards and SWAT team officers,  including the use of excessive force, arbitrary detention, threats,  harassment, intimidation and ill-treatment against striking  seafarers, to break up the strike organised by seafarers from the 9th  to 15th March 2004 in various ports in the Philippines. OMCT has also  been informed that members of the Associated Labour Unions (ALU-TUCP)  have also threatened striking workers.  According to the information received, 22 ships (out of an  operational fleet of 24) and 800 workers employed by the Sulpicio  Lines Inc., participated in a nationwide strike that was launched by  the Unyon ng Mandaaragat sa Sulpicio Lines Inc./Solid towage and  Lighterage Inc. (UMSS-Anglo-KMU) on 9 March 2004 to protest against  poor working conditions, the use of unfair labour practices and  violations of the Memorandum of Agreement that the company had signed  with the workers' representatives (UMSS-Anglo-KMU). An assumption of  jurisdiction order was issued by the Department of Labour and  Employment on 10 March 2004 giving allowing the police to break the  strike.  According to the information received, on 13 March 2004, at about  1.00 pm. at the Manila North Harbour a group of about 400 officers  and guards, consisting of Western Police officers, Special Weapons  and Tactics teams and security guards stormed the vessels of the  striking seafarers. Reportedly, snipers of the Special Weapons and  Tactics (SWAT)  teams pointed their rifles at the striking seafarers  from the rooftop of a building and a warehouse, and that officers  boarded the vessels and forced the striking seafarers to disembark.   The police and SWAT team officers also arbitrarily  detained around  200 of the striking seafarers at the passenger terminal, which can  only accommodate 100 persons and only has one lavatory. The seafarers  were detained there under heavy guard, without any food, until the  following day, 14 March 2004, when they were released at 4.00 pm.  According to the information received, one seafarer was handcuffed  and many others were hit, kicked, and threatened with cocked rifles  by the Police and SWAT team officers. It has also been alleged that  that police and SWAT team officers took valuables like watches,  bracelets and money belonging to the striking seafarers.   OMCT has also received information that on 9 March 2004 heavily armed  Maritime and National Police and Coast Guard officials forcibly  boarded and took over two ships (MV Tacloban Princess and MV Princess  of the Pacific)  in Ormoc City and Polloc ports. It is reported that  seafarers on board the MV Princess of the Pacific were threatened at  gunpoint by the Maritime and National Police and Coast  Guard  officials, who were accompanied by the Brach Manager of the Sulpicio  Lines. A picket line organised by the striking seafarers was also  forcibly cleared by the Police and the Crowd Dispersal Unit  on 12  March 2003.  In Cebu city port, on 10 March 2004  at about 9.30 am, 35 crew  members of 'M/V Cebu Princess' were reportedly threatened at gunpoint  that would be bodily harmed, and overpowered by 50 - 70 armed members  of the Associated Labour Unions (ALU-TUCP), which is alleged to be an  undemocratic union that earlier controlled the Sulpicio Lines Union.  On the same day, armed ALU members also threatened seafarers aboard  another ship in the Cebu port (MV Cotabato Princess) but were  prevented from causing any harm to the seafarers due to the arrival  of supporters of the striking seafarers, which included people from  the church, peasants, workers, and journalists. On 11 March 2004, the  crew of the ship were forcibly disembarked by the Sulpicio Lines Inc.  with the help of Cebu International Port Police officers, Maritime  Police officers, and private security guards.  On 19 March 2004 the striking seafarers decided to comply with the  return-to-work order issued by the Department of Labour and  Employment. Reportedly, the management of the Sulpicio Lines Inc. has  since then only accepted about 400 workers out of the more than 600  workers. The company has refused to accept more than 200 workers, of  which a large majority were union officials and active members of the  union.  Background information  Sulpicio Lines Inc. is one of the top five inter-island shipping  company in the Philippines and  is the second largest domestic  shipping company in the country in terms of number of vessels and  gross tonnage. The company provides inter-island passenger and cargo  services throughout the major ports and cities in the country. In  2002 it had an average of 1,754 employees of which around 1,000 were  employed as seafarers. Its main office and its home port is in Cebu  City, in the central Philippines.   It is reported that the Sulpicio Lines Inc. seafarers' union is under  the control of the 'yellow union', particularly the Associated Labour  Unions (ALU-TUCP) based in Cebu. The union leaders of the yellow  union are alleged to be corrupt and undemocratic. According to the  information received, the company committed a number of labour rights  violations under the existence of yellow union, including illegal  dismissals and illegal suspensions. Seafarers were laid-off during  dry-docking of their vessels, which lasts two to six months and  sometimes longer and there were deductions from the salary of the  seafarers, which are not specified in the payroll. A very low salary  is an other issue. The company pays the seafarer an average salary of  PHP8,000 per month ($142/month), the payment for overtime is one peso  a day ($0.01 cent), no matter how many hours of overtime has been  carried out, and the overtime salary is paid after one or two year.  Food provision for the crew at the vessels is further reported to be  inadequate and the budget is according to the information received  lower than the government's budget for prisoners. It is also reported  that all the vessels  used by the company in their operations are  second hand and that the average age of the vessels is 30 years. The  safety on these vessels is a crucial issue. On 24 December 1987, the  'M/V Dona Paz' sank and claimed about  three thousands lives.  Likewise, 'M/V Dona Marilyn' sank on 24 October 1988, and 'M/V  Princess of the Orient' sank on 18 September 1998. Also these two  events claimed in total thousands of lives. Most recently, in August  2002, there was an explosion in the engine room of one of the vessels  of Sulpicio Lines Inc, 'M/V Tacloban Princess'. The explosion led to  the death of six officers.  In 2001 the seafarers of the Sulpicio Lines Inc. attempted to form  their own union with 658 members (out of the 952 Sulpicio Lines  seafarers), but the members suffered intensified harassments. They  were subjected to frequent suspensions, terminations,  discriminations, threats, physical harassments, verbal abused and  other forms of unacceptable labour practices instigated by the  management together with the existing yellow union (ALU-TUCP). On 3  February 2003 the Sulpicio Lines seafarers organized themselves and  formed their own union, the UMSS.  On 29 July 2003, the UMSS-Anglo-KMU launched a nationwide 36-hour  strike. The strike resulted in a Memorandum of Agreement between the  UMSS-Anglo-KMU and the Sulpicio Lines Inc. management. The management  of Sulpicio Lines Inc. have, however, violated of Memorandum of  Agreement as well as the provisions of the Labour Code of the  Philippines. Among the violations are union busting, illegal  dismissals and suspensions, various forms of harassments as for  example physical and verbal abuse of UMSS members and unlawful  economic discrimination, illegal deductions from wages, illegal  deductions of union dues, illegal deductions for payment of ships'  provision handling, wage distortion, non payment or delayed payment  of 13th month pay and Christmas bonus, and unjust discrimination  against the union members. The UMSS decided in March 2004 to launce  its second strike.   There have been ongoing attempts from the unions side to negotiate  with the management of the Sulpicio Lines Inc. On March 9th and 10th  2004 negotiations at the National Conciliation and Mediation Board  resulted in the drafting ten points by the National Conciliation and  Mediation Board that had been agreed in principle.   On 11 March 2004 at 9:30AM, reportedly an Assumption of Jurisdiction  and a Return to Work order were posted by the Department of  Labour  and Employment at the picket line without informing any officers or  members of UMSS.  At around 11:00am, the management panel arrived to  the negotiating table and announced that they were withdrawing all  their offers made in the previous negotiations. The Assumption of  Jurisdiction issued by the Department of Labour and Employment gave  the Sulpicio Lines management the legal means to break the picket  line and the strike through police intervention.   The legal counsel of UMSS-Anglo-KMU immediately filed a Motion for  Reconsideration at the Office of the Secretary of Labour on the  ground that the Secretary of Labour abused its power when she assumed  jurisdiction over the strike.  On 18 March 2004 at 6:00pm, the legal  counsel received a copy of the denial of the Motion for  Reconsideration from the Secretary of Labour. The Secretary of Labour  further reiterated her former order to return to work without further  delay.   On 19 March 2004, at 8:00am the striking workers, proceeded to the  office of Human Resource Development of the Sulpicio Lines in Manila  and Cebu City. The management, however, reportedly refused to accept  all of the disembarked striking workers.  The workers were met and  dispersed by a truckload of police and security forces and the  management refused to implement the order from the Department of  Labour and Employment. Recent information indicates that since the  management has only accepted about 400 workers out of the more than  600 workers. The company has refused to accept more than 200 workers,  of which a large majority were union officials and active members of  the union.  OMCT is deeply concerned by the human rights violations committed by  the Police and Coast Guard officials and SWAT team members and the  use of excessive force, threats, intimidations, ill-treatment and  illegal detention of seafarers, who were carrying out a peaceful  strike and by the state inaction on the actions of the ALU. OMCT is  also concerned by the  assumption of jurisdiction and return to work  orders issued by the Department of Labour and Employment that gave  the management protection and allowed the police to crush a peaceful  strike using force and repression. The Department has also failed to  act on the labour violations committed by the company and has in  effect forced the workers to return to work without any settlements  on their concerns about working conditions and the violations by the  company of the MOA it signed with the workers' representatives.  OMCT   is also apprehensive about the security of the members of the UMSS  union,  the large number of striking seafarers that the management of  the Sulpicio Lines refused to accept and on the impact these actions  will have on future attempts by the seafarers or other workers to  organise or protest violations of labour rights.    Action requested Please write to the authorities in the Philippines urging them to:  i.	Guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of  these events, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil  competent and impartial tribunal, apply the penal, civil, and/or  administrative sanctions provided by law, and give provide adequate  compensation to the victims; ii.	Take all necessary measures to ensure that the labour and human  rights of the seafarers are protected and realised; iii.	Ensure the safety and integrity of all the seafarers and union  members and ensure that freedom of association and collective  bargaining rights of the seafarers are adequately protected; iv.	Ensure that all seafarers are allowed to resume to work and no  seafarers or union members are targeted by the management for  punitive action; v.	Guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental  freedoms, including economic, social and cultural rights throughout  the country in accordance with international human rights standards.   Addresses Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President, New Executive  Building Malacang Palace Compound, J.P. Laurel St., San Miguel ,  Manila, Philippines  Fax: +632 929 3968, E-mail: opnet@ops.gov.ph or kgma@yahoogroups.com   Gen. Hermogenes Ebdane Police Director, Philippine National Police,  Camp Crame, Quezon City, Philippines Fax: +632 724 8763 , E-mail: ebdane@info.com.ph   The Chief Officer , Philippine National Police ,Camp Crame , Quezon  City, Philippines E-mail: pnp@pnp.gov.ph  Ms. Valera Quisumbing , Chairperson, Commission on Human Rights ,  SAAC Building, UP Complex, Commonwealth Avenue, Diliman, Quezon City,  Philippines  Fax: +632 929-0102 , E-mail: apnr@chr.gov.ph  Ambassador Samuel T. Ramel, Permanent Mission of the Philippines to  the  United Nations in Geneva; Avenue Balnc 47, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland;  Fax: +41 22 716 19 32, E-mail: philippine.mission@ties.itu.int;    Geneva, 08 February 2004  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this  appeal in your reply. 