Honduras:  Rights of victims in the Berta Cáceres murder trial are not respected
November  9, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Honduras / 2018 / NovemberHonduras: Rights of victims in the Berta Cáceres murder trial are not respectedTegucigalpa-Paris-Genève,
November 9, 2018 - Our organisations, involved in the international trial observation
mission of the trial for the assassination of human rights defender Berta
Cáceres on March 3, 2016, express their deep worries concerning the serious
violations of the human rights of the victims and the flaws observed during the
trial, which started on October 19, 2018. 
 
Our organisations denounce the
unacceptable treatment of the victims in this case. During the investigation,
which lasted more than two years and which was marred by numerous
irregularities, the victims were denied access to the totality of the
investigative reports, including key evidence. Furthermore, at the start of the
trial on October 19, the lawyers chosen by Berta Cáceres’ family to represent
them were excluded from the trial without being given a legitimate reason. This
trial for murder, which is being held at the First Chamber of the Tegucigalpa
Criminal Court, is however emblematic of the violence experienced by those who
defend human rights in the Americas. 
 
“By excluding the victims’ lawyers
from the trial and by forcing them to be represented by the Public Prosecutor’s
Office, the court has left them without a voice and has violated their rights
to a fair trial, to truth, and to effective justice, as demanded by
international standards. The victims’ lawyers must be re-admitted as soon as
possible,” said Juan Francisco Soto, CALDH Director and FIDH Vice-President. 
 
“We have observed a large number of
irregularities and flaws, including the fact that the press and the victims
have been prohibited from attending and reporting on the hearings, this in
clear violation of the principle of publicity of hearings which is a fair trial
requirement under criminal procedure. This limitation also impacts the
interests of the public, which has a right to know the truth about these
crimes, particularly as a guarantee of non-repetition,” said Wilfredo Mendez, CIPRODEH
Director. 
 
Furthermore, we consider that the
conclusions of experts should obligate the Prosecution to deepen the
investigation into the links between the companies DESA, CONCASA, PEMSA,
ECOSERVI and SEPSA, and between these companies and those currently facing charges,
as well as the use of companies’ resources to influence statements and actions
by COPINH, the organisation led by Berta Cáceres. Without this, we cannot speak
of a truly effective investigation. 
 
“Throughout the hearings, the
lack of analysis into the context of persecution and attack against COPINH and
against Berta Cáceres Flores has been blatant. It is because of this that we
ask the Public Prosecutor to deepen this element of the investigation, which
would facilitate an understanding of the criminal structures which planned,
ordered and executed her murder; and in consequence, would allow to identify
the beneficiaries of the crime and to investigate, prosecute and punish the
masterminds and high-level perpetrators,” noted Reinaldo Villalba Vargas,
Coordinator of the penal branch of the Lawyers Collective CAJAR. 
 
Similarly, the
mission observed the recurrent practice of beginning hearings with delays and
to suspend them for excessive lengths of time. 
 
Finally, we are particularly
concerned about the climate of vulnerability in which human rights defenders
operate. Honduras has one of the highest rates in the world of murder of human
rights defenders particularly for environmental activists. This is why we ask
the State to take necessary and efficient measures to guarantee a safe and
conducive environment for the exercise of human rights work. 
 
Signatories: 
 
International Federation
of Human Rights - FIDH, in the framework of the Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders (International)
World Organisation Against
Torture - OMCT, in the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (International)
Colectivo de Abogados “José Alvear Restrepo” -
CAJAR (Colombia)
Centro de Acción Legal en Derechos Humanos - CALDH
(Guatemala)
Centro de Investigación y Promoción de los
Derechos Humanos - CIPRODEH (Honduras)
Comité de Familiares de Detenidos Desaparecidos
en Honduras - COFADEH (Honduras) 