Egypt:  Human rights defenders Yara Sallam and Sanaa Seif are free!
September 24, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2015 / SeptemberEgypt: Human rights defenders Yara Sallam and Sanaa Seif are free!

Paris-Geneva, September 24, 2015 –
Yesterday Egyptian President Abdel Fattah Al-Sisi issued a presidential pardon
in favour of 100 imprisoned youths, including human rights defenders Yara
Sallam and Sanaa Seif. Both were released from prison on the same day.
 
Ms.
Yara Sallam, transitional Justice Officer at the Egyptian Initiative for
Personal Rights (EIPR), and Ms. Sanaa Seif, a member of the “No to
Military Trials for Civilians” movement, were among demonstrators arrested in
an anti-Protest Law assembly outside Ittihadiya Palace in June 2014. Both had
been sentenced in appeal in December 2014 along with 21 other protesters to two
years of imprisonment and two years of police surveillance. 
 
They
had been accused of “breaching the protest law” under the “Anti-Protest Law”,
“sabotaging public properties”, “possession of inflammable materials” and
“taking part in showing off force with the objective of terrorising the
public”.
 
Over
the past years, the Observatory had constantly called for their release through
urgent interventions, communications to relevant inter-governmental bodies, and
advocacy actions.
 
“The release of Yara and Sanaa is a huge relief
for the whole human rights movement. Nonetheless, their judicial harassment is
a reminder of the ongoing repression of human rights defenders in Egypt. The authorities must now amend the 2013 anti-protest law
and make it compliant with the country’s international law obligations”,
FIDH President Karim Lahidji said today. 
 
“While
welcoming the release of Yara and Sanaa, we deplore that other human rights
defenders such as Mahienour El-Massry or Alaa Abdel-Fattah remain behind bars
for their legitimate human rights activities. We call for the immediate and
unconditional release of all human rights defenders detained throughout the
country and for an immediate end of the authorities’ crackdown on dissident
voices”, OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock added.

 
The
Observatory recalls that the restrictive protest law has been used by the
authorities as a tool to imprison human rights defenders. This controversial
law bans gatherings of 10 or more people without a permit issued by the
authorities.
 
 
The Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in 1997 by FIDH
and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this
programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against
human rights defenders. 