Russian Federation:  ADC “Memorial” officially declared a “foreign agent” by the court
December 12, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2013 / DecemberRussian Federation: ADC “Memorial” officially declared a “foreign agent” by the court

Paris-Geneva, December 12, 2013. On December 12,
2013, the Anti-Discrimination Centre (ADC) “Memorial” was officially declared a
“foreign agent” by the Leninsky District Court of St Petersburg, and was
ordered to register as such with the Ministry of Justice, according to the
information received by the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders[1].
 
Today, the court unexpectedly established that all the activities
of ADC “Memorial” fall under the definition of “performing the functions of a
foreign agent”. Accordingly, for the first time, a court has directly labelled
a human rights NGO a “foreign agent”, and did not just order it to register as
such. This decision could pave the way to increased harassment of human rights
organisations in the Russian Federation. 
 
“This decision is evidence of the judicial harassment of ADC
“Memorial”, and it is clear that the judge and the prosecutor are implementing
political orders from above” said FIDH Vice-President Tolekan
Ismailova, who observed today's hearing in the framework of an international
judicial observation mission for the Observatory. “It was just an
appalling court hearing, marked by injustice and discrimination. The court
satisfied all the demands of the prosecutor and rejected all the petitions of
the lawyers of ADC “Memorial””, she added. 
 
ADC “Memorial” was taken to courts over a report entitled “Roma,
migrants, activists: victims of police abuse” submitted back in November 2012
to the UN Committee Against Torture (CAT). According to the prosecutor, this
report proves ADC's involvement in political activities and its function as a
“foreign agent” as it allegedly received foreign funding. This case was
rejected by the administrative court, which found that the complaint of the
prosecutor was unfounded. In July 2013 the prosecutor started another, civil,
process “on behalf of an 'undefined group of citizens'” that, according to the
prosecutor, would be protected by ADC's registration as a ”foreign agent”. 
 
Surprisingly, at today's hearing, the prosecutor stated that ADC
“Memorial” was guilty because of all its activities, and not just the report.
He argued that the report was in fact inseparable from all other past and
future activities of ADC, which are allegedly of “political” nature and would
supposedly tarnish the image of the police and the army. The prosecutor had
used the same reasoning in his protest regarding a decision favourable to ADC
“Memorial” in the administrative process (see below).
 
“ADC “Memorial” is a legitimate human rights NGO, which, like any
other NGO, should be protected rather than criminalised. This decision amounts
to an intolerable presumption of guilt for ADC “Memorial” and its activities”,
FIDH President Karim Lahidji deplored.
 
“We call upon the Russian
authorities to repeal that verdict and to put an end to this escalating
harassment of NGOs. Ultimately, human rights are in
the national interest of any democratic State”, said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
 
The hearing was observed by representatives from the European Union,
Belgium, the United Kingdom, Sweden, Finland and Lithuania.
 
The verdict shall be notified to ADC “Memorial” within five days, and
ADC will have one month to appeal the decision. 
 
Background information 
 
Following the introduction of the law on 'foreign agent' in spring 2013,
hundreds of NGOs have been inspected by prosecutors. These inspections resulted
in further unprecedented harassment: as of December 2013 two NGOs have been
suspended, at least 11 have been taken to court, and dozens have received
official notices of violations or warnings not to violate the law. 
 
ADC “Memorial” has been facing two cases: administrative and civil. In
both cases the prosecutor argues that ADC Memorial is a foreign agent as in
November 2012 it submitted a report to the CAT entitled “Roma, migrants,
activists: victims of police abuse”. 
 
The civil case is based on Article 45, part 1 of the Code on Civil
Procedure, which allows the prosecutor to turn to the court on behalf of an
“unspecified group of citizens”. The prosecutor argues that by failing to
register as a “foreign agent”, ADC “Memorial” broke the law and continues to
mislead this “unspecified group” about its activities. 
 
The administrative case against ADC “Memorial” was lodged by the
prosecutor in April 2013 and was rejected in May 2013 by the Mirovoy Court no.
8 of St Petersburg. The court found that the evidence brought by the
prosecutor’s office was inconclusive and insufficient to prove that the ADC
Memorial was a “foreign agent”. All the appeals and “protests”[2] of
the prosecutor were likewise rejected. The court stipulated that there were no
legal grounds for the very inspection of ADC Memorial's premises in the spring
of 2013. 
 
In Russia, administrative processes can only concern offences committed
within the past three months, so the case of ADC “Memorial” is already long
expired. Despite this, on November 5, 2013, the prosecutor lodged a new
“protest” to the City Court of Saint
Petersburg, where he demands that the court cancel the decision of the District
Court. In this protest he went beyond the report submitted to the CAT and claimed that “due to
the constant nature of the activities of ADC “Memorial”, it can be concluded
that the offence it committed has a lasting character” and is “inseparable from
all other types of its activities”.
 
For more information,
please contact:
·       
FIDH: Arthur Manet/Audey Couprie: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
·       
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39



[1] A joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT).


[2] A "protest" is another way
in which a prosecutor can appeal decisions, including decisions of courts in
administrative cases. 