Anti-torture coalition fights threats to human rights with new global initiative
February  6, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / 2018 / February Anti-torture coalition fights threats to human rights with new global initiative   Geneva, Mexico, Manila, Lomé, 6 February 2018 (OMCT) – To halt populism’s overturning of
human rights protections, the world’s largest anti-torture network today rallied
partners on three continents to launch joint efforts to boost compliance with
international standards, bring more cases to justice, and find ways to better
protect those most vulnerable to abuse.
The World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT), in coordination with three key partners in Asia, Africa and
Latin America, is spearheading the 1.8-million-CHF project dubbed “Civil
Society United Against Torture” to run activities in 40 countries over three
years until 2020. The Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands and the European Union are supporting the project.
Long-standing partners the Philippines Alliance for Human Rights Advocates (PAHRA), the Collectif
des Associations Contre l’Impunité au Togo (CACIT), and the Centro
de Derechos Humanos Fray Bartolomé de las Casas A.C. (Frayba) will co-organize activities in their
respective regions of Asia, Africa and Latin America, focusing on 15 countries that
require particularly imminent attention, including Afghanistan, Bangladesh,
Pakistan, the Philippines, Russia, Mexico, Honduras, Togo, and Ivory Coast. 
“As autocratic leaders increasingly threaten
human rights by surfing the wave of intolerance, terrorism and migrant inflows,
civil society must coalesce to stop them from breaking what has cost so much to
build,” said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock. “This project will
provide the superglue that will help the pieces hold together.”
A three-legged approach
“We will be drawing on our in-house
pool of legal experts and long-standing know-how as civil-society coordinator
before the CAT as well as the years of our partners’ experience in fighting
torture in hostile environments to make sure that the advocacy, litigation and
research turn into reality for the people who need it the most,” said Carin
Benninger-Budel, who will head the programme at OMCT headquarters in Geneva.
The programme will rely on
information- and experience-sharing among OMCT’s SOS-Torture network members and their local partners to ensure the lessons learned in the
long fight against torture will stick beyond the three-year period. 
To tackle all issues and gaps
effectively, the initiative will focus on three major aims, measured against
specific deliverables:
1.    
Through
a series of advocacy missions, NGO meetings, session screenings, reports and expert
support, encourage civil society organizations to submit information to the
United Nations Committee Against Torture (CAT) and to make better use of the
international human rights mechanism to obtain redress against torture in their
home countries; 
2.    
Through
case studies, webinars and trainings
sustainably up-skill human rights lawyers on the specificities of torture
documentation and litigation so they can better fight cases, with the concrete
objective of bringing at least 10 new cases of torture to trial per region
within national, regional or universal jurisdictions; the project will also support victims and their families,
who will receive 150 grants for medical, social and legal rehabilitation
3.    
Through
production of four research reports on the
particular risks facing women, children, migrants and indigenous people in
the three regions, provide evidence of violation trends and solutions to
address them.
Mexican partner
Frayba is an
internationally known and well-connected organization in Mexico, with more than
25 years of experience protecting the rights of indigenous peoples and working
towards a peaceful resolution of conflicts in Chiapas and throughout the
country. It has extensive litigation experience with domestic courts and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. 
Mexico, as well as the region more
broadly, need policy and institutional reforms to combat discrimination and
investigate torture and other human rights violations against indigenous
peoples. The inclusion of this perspective in CAT advocacy ahead of the
upcoming review of the country’s application of the Convention Against Torture is
considered a paramount priority.
“This project will reinforce the
work carried out to raise awareness about the torture the indigenous peoples of
Latin America suffer as they fight to defend their territories amid violence
and impunity,” said Jorge Hernández Castro, in charge of coordinating the
programme on behalf of Frayba.
Togolese partner
CACIT is a domestic
human rights network that has taken on a lead role in fighting torture and
impunity in Togo since 2007. CACIT provides assistance to victims of torture
including before the Truth and Reconciliation Commission as well as legal
assistance and medical and psychological care. It also undertakes monitoring of
prisons in the country and has conducted research to understand what prevents to
torture victims from filing complaints. Finally, CACIT conducts and undertakes
joint lobbying and advocacy – including with OMCT – both internationally
and at home to trigger policy reform, in particular on detention conditions. 
On top of urging Togo
to submit its overdue state report to the CAT, CACIT advocates the effective
implementation of the new anti-torture law criminalizing torture subsequent to
the CAT’s review of the country’s in 2012. Other of its activities include
advocacy and lobbying with State officials on anti-torture policies, notably to
end impunity and approve a national preventive mechanism, and a set of radio
and television programmes designed to explain torture and the need to fight it
to the general public in Togo. 
“This project will give victims hope
again as they need justice and reparation to fruitfully contribute to their
societies,” said Ghislain Koffi Nyaku, Executive Director of CACIT. “Impunity is society’s worst scourges and we must eradicate it.”
Pilipino partner
PAHRA is one
of the most experienced organizations in Asia with regard to use of the CAT and
torture documentation. It has submitted alternative reports, including jointly
with OMCT, to the 2009 and 2016 CAT reviews of the Philippines. PAHRA, with
other local partners, has moreover successfully used the CAT review to recommend
the adoption of an anti-torture law that came into force in 2009 only a few
months after the country’s CAT review. PAHRA has solid experience in litigation
and extensive connections with other civil-society organizations and human
rights defenders in the region. It is a member of Forum Asia, a network of 58 NGOs in 19 countries of Asia, and
its representatives regularly take part in regional and international
conferences and consultations on human rights.
“With the new Administration, we
went back to where we were decades ago in terms of human rights. This project
will give hope and strength to sustain our work fighting against the shrinking
space for civil society in the Philippines and Asia at large,” said Edeliza
Hernandez, Executive Director of Medical Action Group, a member of PAHRA, and focal point for this project.
About
OMCT
The World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) is the catalyst of the SOS-Torture network,
a coalition of more than 200 international and national non-governmental
organizations fighting torture, summary execution, enforced disappearances and
all other cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment and punishment.
With
offices in Geneva, Brussels and Tunis, OMCT runs programmes to favour State
compliance with international law and national anti-torture legislation, provide
urgent assistance to victims of torture and seek justice for them, advocate
greater protection for children in detention, women, and human rights defenders
worldwide.
For more information, please visit: www.omct.org
For example of our awareness-raising campaigns: www.joinhat.org
Follow us online:
Twitter
Facebook
https://vimeo.com/omct
For more information on the programme, contact Carin Benninger-Budel at cbb@omct.org.
For all media inquiries: Lori Brumat, OMCT Head of
Communications  +41 22 809 4933 or lb@omct.org. 