Israel:  Ongoing arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Mr. Salah Hamouri
September 27, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2017 / SeptemberIsrael: Ongoing arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Mr. Salah Hamouri
New information
ISR 001 / 0917 / OBS 096.1
Arbitrary detention /
Judicial harassment
Israel / Occupied Palestinian Territory
September
27, 2017
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territory.

 
New information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing arbitrary
detention and judicial harassment of Mr.
Salah Hamouri, a Franco-Palestinian lawyer and field researcher with
Addameer Prisoner Support and Human Rights Association (Addameer)[1]
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory.                     
According to the information received, on September 17,
2017, Jerusalem District Court confirmed a six months’ administrative detention[2]
against Mr. Salah Hamouri. Although, the charges against Mr. Hamouri were not
known at the time of this Urgent Appeal, he would reportedly be accused by
Israeli authorities of being a member of the Popular Front for the Liberation
of Palestine (PFLP) and a threat to national security in Jerusalem and
surrounding areas in the West Bank.
 
Mr. Salah Hamouri has been detained since August 23,
3017, when he was arrested from his house in Jerusalem by the Israeli army and
immediately placed under a six months administrative detention ordered by the Minister
of Defense, Mr. Avigdor Liberman. 
 
Subsequently, on September 5, 2017, the Jerusalem
District Court reinstated a sentence against Mr. Salah Hamouri originally
issued in 2005 and ordered him to serve the remaining three-month sentence (see
background information). However, on September 13, 2017, the Israeli Supreme
Court annulled the Jerusalem District Court decision.
 
Mr. Salah Hamouri was initially detained in
al-Mascobiyeh (The Russian Compound) interrogation facility in Jerusalem before
being transferred on September 7, 2017, to Ketziot (al-Naqab) prison, where he
remains detained to date.

In addition, Mr. Salah Hamouri’s wife, Ms. Elsa Lefort,
a French national, is currently banned by Israeli authorities from entering
Palestine.
 
The Observatory condemns the arbitrary detention and
judicial harassment of Mr. Salah
Hamouri as it only seems to aim at sanctioning his human rights activities, in
particular with Palestinian political prisoners.
 
The Observatory urges Israeli authorities to
immediately release Mr. Salah Hamouri, as well as to put an end to all forms of
harassment, including at the judicial level, against him and members of his
family. The Observatory further urges to ensure that all the judicial
proceedings against Mr. Salah Hamouri are carried out in full compliance with
his right to a fair trial as protected under international law.
 
Background information:
 
On March 13, 2005, Mr. Salah Hamouri was arrested by
the Israeli military at Qalqiliya checkpoint and sentenced to seven years in
prison for his alleged involvement in a plot to assassinate Rabbi Ovadia Yosef,
spiritual leader of the religious and ultra-orthodox party Shas, and former
Chief Rabbi of Israel. Mr. Salah Hamouri was to be released on March 13, 2012,
but instead, was set free on December 18, 2011, as part of the Wafa Al Ahrar
prisoner exchange deal[3].
 
Subsequent to his re-arrest on August 23, 2017, on
August 29, 2017, the Jerusalem Magistrate Court ordered his conditional release
and his placement under house arrest in Al-Reineh for 20 days. The Court also
banned Mr. Salah Hamouri from entering Jerusalem, from travelling outside the
country for three months and ordered a 10,000 NIS (approx. 2642 Euros) bail.
 
However, when Mr. Salah Hamouri’s family went to pay
the bail, they were told he would not be released and had received a six-months
administrative detention order, which had been issued on August 23, 2017 by the
Minister of Defence without being notified to Mr. Salah Hamouri.
 
On September 5, 2017, the Jerusalem District Court
reinstated a sentence against Mr. Salah Hamouri originally issued in 2005 and
ordered him to serve the remaining three-month sentence. This represents the
time that was left for Mr. Salah Hamouri to serve prior to his release as part
of the Wafa Al Ahrar exchange deal. A representative from the French Consulate
in Jerusalem and Mr. Salah Hamouri’s father were prevented from entering the
courtroom.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities of Israel urging them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Salah Hamouri as
well as that of all human rights defenders in Israel and the Occupied
Palestinian Territory;
 
ii. Immediately and
unconditionally release Mr. Salah Hamouri as well as all detained human rights
defenders in Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territory as their detention is arbitrary since it only seems to aim at punishing him
for their human rights activities;
 
iii.
In the meantime, ensure that all the
judicial proceedings against Mr. Salah Hamouri are carried out in full
compliance with his right to a fair trial as protected under international law;
 
iv.
Put an end to all forms of harassment, including at the judicial level, against
Mr. Salah Hamouri, his family, as well as against all human rights defenders in
Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territory;
 
v. Comply with the
provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the
General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular Articles 1 and 12.2;
 
vi. More generally, ensure
in all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
throughout Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territory in accordance with
international human rights instruments. 
 
Addresses:


• Mr. Benjamin
Netanyahu, Prime Minister of Israel – Minister of Foreign
Affairs; Fax: + 972 267 055 55 / 972-2-5303367; Email: b.netanyahu@pmo.gov.il, pm_eng@pmo.gov.il
• Mr. Avigdor
Liberman, Minister of Defense; Fax: +972 369 169 40; Email:
aliberman@knesset.gov.il
• Ms. Ayelet Shaked;
Minister of Justice; Fax: +972 262 886 18; E-mail: sar@justice.gov.il
• Mr. Shai Nitzan,
State Attorney; Email: state-attorney@justice.gov.il
· H.E. Ambassador Ms. Aviva
Raz Shechter, Permanent Mission of Israel to the United Nations in Geneva,
Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 716 05 55. Emil: mission-israel@geneva.mfa.gov.il
· H.E. Ambassador Simona
Frankel; Embassy of Israel in Belgium and Luxembourg, Fax: +32 2 373.56.17;
Email: web@brussels.mfa.gov.il

Please also write to the diplomatic mission or
embassy of Israel in your respective country.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, September 27, 2017
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT partnership,
is dedicated to the protection of human rights defenders and aims to offer them
concrete support in their time of need. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders
Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency
line:
Email: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·       Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1
43 55 18 80 
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1] Addameer (Arabic for
conscience) is a Palestinian NGO that works to support Palestinian political
prisoners held in Israeli and Palestinian prisons offering free legal aid to
political prisoners, advocating their rights at the national
and international level, and working to end torture and other violations
of prisoners' rights. It is also a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network.


[2] Administrative detention is a procedure that allows the Israeli military to
hold prisoners indefinitely on secret information without charging them or
allowing them to stand trial. For more information see http://www.addameer.org/israeli_military_judicial_system/administrative_detention



[3] On October 18, 2011, 477
Palestinian prisoners were released from Israeli prisons as part of an exchange
deal in which Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit, who had been abducted by Hamas in
2006, was released. Several of the freed Palestinian prisoners have been
re-imprisoned since then. 