Kenya:  Legislative moves put civil society at risk!
November 20, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kenya / 2013 / NovemberKenya: Legislative moves put civil society at risk!Paris-Geneva, November 20, 2013. The Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, an FIDH-OMCT joint programme,
expresses concern over recent bills aiming to amend the laws regulating NGOs as
well as the media, which constitute a major threat to the Kenyan civil society.
 
On October 30, 2013, the
office of the Attorney General published the Miscellaneous Amendment Bill in
the official gazette, in view of its introduction to Parliament. 
 
If adopted in its current
form, the new text would limit to a maximum of 15% the proportion of foreign
funding that an NGO would be allowed to receive from external donors, and would
impose any funding to be channelled through a new “Public Benefits
Organisations (PBO) Federation”, rather than directly from donors.
 
The text would further
allow the PBO Authority - a new official body whose chairperson would be
appointed directly by the President of the Republic - to “impose terms and
conditions for the grant of certificates of registration, permits of operation,
and public organisations status”.
 
“This
broadly worded bill poses serious threats to the very existence and functioning
of NGOs in Kenya, contradicts the spirit and letter of the 2010 Constitution
and blatantly violates regional and international standards”
said Karim Lahidji, President of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH). “In a country such as Kenya, where NGOs play a central role in
the public debate and the efforts aimed at strengthening the rule of law,
restricting their capacity to carry out their work would have disastrous
impacts on all spheres of society”, he added.
 
This
new bill would provide the government with the ability to control all funds
coming into the country, and hence to attack the entire civil society sector.
This would result in further isolation of the governance civil society
organisations that have been keeping the government accountable.
 
“The very nature of the progressive Constitution
recently adopted is build on broad civil society participation and human
rights. Those are inherently Kenyan values not an international conspiracy”, said Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). “There should be no mistake. This is not a
technical issue about a law. This is an alarm for democratic achievements in
Kenya. The grip on the media extended, the National Human Rights Commission
left in limbo and disabled with massive budgets cut, and now human rights
defenders being framed. Today, sadly, it takes courage to work on critical
human rights issues”, he added.
 
The
Observatory highlights that in his first report to the Human Rights Council, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the right to peaceful assembly and freedom of association recommended
that “any associations, both registered or unregistered, should have the right to seek and secure funding and resources from domestic, foreign, and international entities, including individuals, businesses, civil society organizations, Governments and international organizations”. Earlier, the UN Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders had already
emphasised that the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders protects the right to “receive funding from different sources, including foreign ones”.
 
The Observatory is all the
more concerned as the above-mentioned Miscellaneous Amendment Bill was
introduced alongside an Information and Communications (Amendment) Bill on
October 31, which would restrict advertising revenue, permit anonymous
complaints that are prone to abuse, and create a government-appointed
Communications and Multimedia Appeals Tribunal with unfettered powers to impose
penalties on media practitioners, including revocation of accreditation,
seizure of property, and heavy fines of up to 1 million Kenyan shillings
(US$12,000) on journalists, and up to 20 million Kenyan shillings (US$235,000)
on media companies. The Media Council Bill would also give the government
powers to ban any media content that is “prejudicial to public or national
interest” and impose penalties against the publishers of such content, while
failing to clearly define “national or public interest”. The Information and
Communications (Amendment) Bill was passed by Parliament but has not yet been
signed by President Uhuru Kenyatta.
 
The Observatory calls upon
the Kenyan authorities to comply with the provisions of the UN Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, as well as to fully implement the provisions of Resolution
A/HRC/22/L.13 adopted by the UN Human Rights Council on March 15, 2013, calling
upon States, in particular, to ensure that reporting requirements placed on
individuals, groups and organs of society do not inhibit functional autonomy,
and furthermore to ensure that they do not discriminatorily impose restrictions
on potential sources of funding aimed at supporting the work of human rights
defenders in accordance with the Declaration [on human rights defenders], and
that no law should criminalize or delegitimize activities in defence of human
rights on account of the origin of funding thereto.
 
The Observatory further
urges the Kenyan authorities to abide by the provisions of the African
Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights (ACHPR) resolution on the right to freedom of
association (Resolution 5, 1992), calling upon member States not to “override
constitutional provisions or undermine fundamental rights guaranteed by the
constitution and international standards; [and not to] enact provisions which would
limit the exercise of this freedom” as well as the provisions of the ACHPR
2002 Declaration of principles on freedom of expression in Africa.
 
For
more information, please contact:
·    FIDH:
Audrey Couprie: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18

OMCT:
     Delphine Reculeau: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 