Thailand:  The judicial harassment against 11 activists continues
May  3, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2016 / MayThailand: The judicial harassment against 11 activists continues

New
information
THA 001 /
0116 / OBS 008.2
Sentencing / Temporary bail /
Judicial
harassment /
Restrictions
to freedom of movement
Thailand
May 3, 2016
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Thailand.

New
information:
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the ongoing judicial harassment against Mr. Anon Nampa, Mr. Sirawit Seritiwat, Ms. Kornkanok Kanta, Mr. Kititach
Suman, Mr. Wisarut Anupoonkarn
and Mr. Wijit Hanhaboon, six of the
11 activists[1]
arrested on December 7, 2015 (see background information).
According to the information received, on April 25,
2016, at 10 am, the Bangkok Military Court held the first hearing of the trial
against the above-mentioned six activists, and indicted them on charges of violating
Article 12 of the Head of National Council for Peace and Order (NCPO) Order No.
3/2015, which restricts the right to assembly or any political gathering of
five or more persons without a prior official
authorization.[2] It has to be noted that this
case is the first to be processed under charges of violating Order No. 3/2015.
On the same day, at 8.20 pm, the six activists were
temporarily released on bail from the Bangkok Remand Prison and the Central
Women Institution, following the payment of 40,000 baht (around 1,000 euros).
The conditions imposed by the court for the bail were that: (1) they must
refrain from inciting or causing unrest by whatsoever means or acts in order to
inflict damage or to disrupt order and peace; and (2) they are prohibited from
leaving Thailand, unless permission is granted by the
court. The date of the next
hearing is still pending.
At the time
of publication of this Urgent Appeal,
the other five activists
arrested on December 7, 2015, were still facing charges. One of them, Mr.
Thanet Anantawong, is
currently in exile, while arrest warrants have been issued for Ms. Chonthicha Jaeung-Rew, Ms. Chanoknan
Ruamsap, Mr. Korakot Saengyenpan and Mr. Abhisit Sapnaphapan for failing to report themselves to the prosecutor. The four remainat
risk of being arrested at any time.
The Observatory strongly condemns the indictment and
ongoing judicial harassment against the 11 activists, since they appear to only
aim at sanctioning their legitimate human rights activities, as well as their
freedom of assembly, association and expression, as enshrined in international
human rights instruments.
More generally, the Observatory calls on the Thai
authorities to put an end to the ongoing attempts to criminalise the 11
activists, as well as to repeal the decrees on gatherings and protests that fail to comply
with international human rights standards related to the right to freedom of
peaceful assembly.
Background information: 
On
December 7, 2015, military authorities arrested 36 people, including student
activists, during a train ride from Bangkok to Hua Hin, Prachuab Kirikhan
Province. Their “advocacy trip,” named “the Train Ride to Shed Light on Fraud
at the Rajabhakti Park,” sought to demand the opening of an investigation into
alleged corruption in the construction of the military-sponsored Rajabhakti
Park in Prachuab Kirikhan Province. The military officers claimed to have
arrested and detained them in accordance with the Head of NCPO Order No.
3/2015. 
While
in custody, some officers recorded their personal data and forced them to sign
a pledge vowing that they would not join any political movement again and that
they would not leave the country without the authorities’ prior permission.
Lawyers were denied access to the detainees throughout their detention. All
were released on the same day.
However,
11 activists, Mr. Sirawit Seritiwat, Mr. Anon Nampa, Ms. Chonthicha Jaeung-Rew, Ms. Chanoknan Ruamsap, Mr. Thanet Anantawong, Mr. Kititituch Suman, Mr. Wisarut Anukulkanm, Mr. Abhisit Sapnaphapan,
Mr. Korakot Saengyenpan, Ms. Kornkanok
Khumta, and Mr. Vichit Hanhaboon,
refused to sign the pledge, and were therefore accused of violating the Head of
NCPO Order No. 3/2015.
On
December 29, 2015, the 11 activists who had refused to sign the pledge were
summoned by the Thonburi Railway police. Only the following five activists out
of the 11 summoned appeared: Messrs. Kititituch Suman and Vichit Hanhaboon, Mr.
Anon Nampa, Mr. Wisarut Anukulkanm, and Ms. Kornkanok Khumta. They denied all
charges. 
On
January 13, 2016, arrest warrants were issued by the Bangkok Military Court for
the six remaining activists who had failed to appear at the police station on
January 8 as summoned.
On January 20, 2016, Mr. Sirawit Seritiwat was
abducted by eight men wearing military uniforms outside the gate of the
Thammasat University Ransgit campus in Pathumthani Province near Bangkok. He
was blindfolded, forced onto a pick-up truck with covered plate and taken to an
unknown area. When the car stopped, he was dragged to a grass field where he
was forced to kneel down, hit on the head, and kicked. Around 1 am, he was
taken to the Nimitmai police station in Bangkok, where he was held until the
following morning, before being transferred again to Bangkok’s Thonburi Railway
police station.
The next day, on January 21, 2016, at around 9 am, the
police arrested fellow student activists Ms. Chonthicha Jaeung-Rew, Ms.
Chanoknan Ruamsap, and Mr. Korakot Saengyenpan, who had shown up at the
Thonburi Railway police station to show solidarity with Mr. Seritiwat.
The four student activists were held at the police
station until 1:30 pm before being taken to the Bangkok Military Court where
the police filed a petition requesting pre-trial detention. They were released
after the Court dismissed the police request. Around the same time, Mr. Abhisit
Sapnaphapan[3]
was arrested in front of the Military Court and taken to the nearby
Chanasongkram police station, before being transferred to the Thonburi Railway
police station in relation to previous charges of violating the Head of NCPO
Order No. 3/2015. Mr. Abhisit Sapnaphapan was released on January 22 at about
11:30 am after the Bangkok Military Court rejected a police request for
pre-trial detention.
Actions
requested:
Please
write to the authorities in Thailand, urging them to:


i.             
Guarantee in all circumstances the
physical and psychological integrity of the 11 activists, as well as of all
human rights defenders in the country;
ii.            
Drop immediately and unconditionally
all charges against the 11 activists, as they only seem to be aimed at
sanctioning their legitimate human rights activities;




iii.          
Put an end to all acts of harassment
- including at the judicial level - against the 11 activists, as well as
against all human rights defenders in Thailand so that they are able to carry
out their work without hindrances;




iv.          
Repeal the Head of NCPO Order No.
3/2015, which contravenes Thailand’s human rights obligations under the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR);




v.           
Conform with the provisions of the
UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of
the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially: 




Article 1, which states that “everyone
has the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to
strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms at the national and international levels”;
and
Article 12.2, which provides that “"the State shall take all necessary measures to
ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually
and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
and




vi.          
More generally, ensure in all
circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with
international and regional human rights instruments ratified by Thailand.




Addresses:


·      
Prime Minister, Gen Prayuth
Chan-ocha, Government House, 1 Phitsanulok Road, Dusit, 10300, Bangkok,
THAILAND; Fax: +66 (0) 2 282 5131
·      
Minister of Interior, Gen Anupong
Paochinda, Asatang Road, Ratchabophit, 10200, Bangkok, THAILAND
·      
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Don
Pramudwinai, Sri Ayutthaya Building, 443 Sri Ayutthaya Road, Phaya Thai, 10400,
Bangkok, THAILAND; Fax: +66 (0) 2 643 5320; Email: minister@mfa.go.th
·      
Minister of Justice, Gen Paiboon Khumchaya,
120 Chaeng Watthana Road, Laksi, 10210, Bangkok, THAILAND; Fax: +66 (0) 2 953
0503
·      
Pol Gen Somyot Poompanmoung,
Commissioner-General of the Royal Thai Police, 1st Building, 7th Floor, Rama I
Road, Pathumwan, 10330, Bangkok, THAILAND; Fax: +66 (0) 2 251 5956 / +66 (0) 2
251 8702
·      
Mr. Wat Tingsamit, Chairperson of
the National Human Rights Commission of Thailand; 120 Chaeng Watthana Road,
Laksi, 10210, Bangkok, THAILAND; Email: help@nhrc.or.th
·      
Permanent Mission of Thailand to the
United Nations in Geneva, rue Gustave Moynier 5, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Tel:
+ 41 22 715 10 10; Fax: + 41 22 715 10 00 / 10 02; Email:mission.thailand@ties.itu.int
·      
Embassy of Thailand in Brussels, 2
Sq. du Val de la Cambre, 1050 Ixelles, Belgium, Tel: + 32 2 640 68 10; Fax: +
32 2 648 30 66; Email: thaibxl@pophost.eunet.be


Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Thailand in your respective
country.



[1]                 The group includes members of the Neo Democracy
Movement (NDM), an organisation advocating for the restoration of democracy,
for the end of trials against civilians before military courts, and for the
respect of human rights and freedoms. NDM is driven by five principles:
democracy, human rights, justice, public participation and peaceful means
(non-violence).




[2]                 Article 12(1) of Head of NCPO Order No. 3/2015 states
that any political gathering of five or more persons shall be punished with
imprisonment not exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding ten thousand
baht, or both, unless permission has been granted by the Head of the NCPO or an
authorised representative.




[3]                 On May 22, 2015, Thai police arrested student
activists with the Neo Democracy Movement (NDM) , including Mr. Abhisit
Sapnaphapan, in connection with their participation in peaceful protests held
in Khon Kaen and in Bangkok to mark the first anniversary of the military coup.
See Observatory Urgent Appeal THA 002 / 0715 / OBS 055.2 