Switzerland:  Letter to CNPT: Serious concern about the conditions of detention of Ms. Nekane Txapartegi
June 15, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Urgent Interventions / Switzerland / 2017 / JuneSwitzerland: Letter to CNPT: Serious concern about the conditions of detention of Ms. Nekane Txapartegi



LETTER TO THE CHAIRMAN OF THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR THE PREVENTION OF TORTUREProf. Dr. iur. Alberto Achermann Chairman of the National Commission for the Prevention of Torture Address: Taubernstrasse 16
3003 Bern Telephone: +41 58 465 16 20
Fax: +41 58 464 26 55

Geneva, 15 June 2017

Re: Serious concern about the conditions of detention of Ms. Nekane Txapartegi, victim
of torture, held in Zürich Prison awaiting extradition to Spain

Dear Prof. Dr. iur. Alberto Achermann,

The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), the largest network of NGOs fighting
against torture, summary executions, enforced disappearances and all other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment in the world, is writing to you to express serious concern
about the imprisonment and inadequate conditions of detention of Ms. Nekane Txapartegi,
currently held in Zürich Prison (Gefängnis Zürich).

Ms. Nekane Txapartegi was arrested in Zurich on 6 April 2016 following an extradition
request issued by the Spanish authorities on 25 May 2015, after she fled the country in 2007.
Ms. Txapartegi was sentenced to 6 years and 9 months in prison in 2007 for collaboration
with a criminal organization (ETA), conviction reduced in February 2017 by the Spanish
Supreme Court to 3,5 years, in application of article 579 bis 4 of the Penal Code, allowing for
the reduction of prison sentences for offences of a less serious nature.

Strong evidence indicates that Ms. Txapartegi was tortured to extract self-incriminating
statements leading to her conviction. Ms. Txapartegi was apprehended on 9 March 1999 by
the Spanish Guardia Civil (Civil Guard) and held for five days in incommunicado detention.
During the 120 hours in custody, she was subjected to brutal acts of torture including rape and
sexual assault, beatings, suffocation through plastig bags, threats of electric shocks, sleep
deprivation, forced nudity and a mock execution.

Despite the existence of solid evidence including eyewitness testimony and medical reports
identifying multiple injuries and psychological sequelae consistent with torture, information
extracted during the period of incommunicado detention was used as a key piece of evidence
to convict her. In addition, the complaint of torture lodged by Ms. Txapartegi was shelved
without previously questioning the vast majority of suspects.







Ms. Txapartegi has been deprived of liberty in Switzerland awaiting extradition to Spain for
the last 14 months, since 6 April 2016. On 23 March 2017, the Swiss Federal Office of Justice
(OFJ) cleared her extradition to Spain in a decision with multiple elements indicating evident
disregard for her past torture claims. The decision was contested, among others, by the current
Special Rapporteur on torture, Mr. Nils Melzer (see press statement released on 24 April
2017, available on OHCHR website). Appeals are now pending with the Federal Criminal
Court and the Federal Administrative Court.

OMCT wishes to express concern over the failure of the Swiss competent authorities to
conduct a prompt, thorough and independent examination, based on the standards and
principles of the Istanbul Protocol, to assess the credibility of the torture claims alleged by
Ms. Txapartegi prior to her imprisonment. The lack of a proper medical, gender-sensitive
screening, vital to ensure that any health care condition and needs, including post-traumatic
stress disorder1, were addressed immediately, is contrary to international standards and has
entailed very adverse consequences for the mental well-being of Ms. Txapartegi, who has re-
experienced the very traumatic acts endured back in Spain. In addition to it, prison authorities
failed to carry out a gender-sensitive and trauma-informed mental health care assessment and
programme to meet the health-care needs of Ms. Txapartegi in prison, contravening Rule 6 of
the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures
for Women Offenders, hereinafter “Bangkok Rules” 2.

It is also worth mentioning that by ordering her immediate and unconditional imprisonment,
the Swiss authorities failed to consider alternatives to detention on account of the caretaking
responsibilities of Ms. Txapartegi, who is the primary carer of a 8-year old girl (Rule 2(2) of
the Bangkok Rules).

Following a visit to Ms. Txapartegi in March 2017, OMCT aims to draw attention hereafter to
several issues of concern, which relate to the conditions of detention of Ms. Txapartegi and
the ensuing revictimisation she is subject to on a continuing basis, taking into account the
negative effects of the following limitations and practices, individually and in an aggregated
manner:

I) Conditions of detention (individual dimension)

Severity of conditions in maximum security facilities: Ms. Txapartegi is held in a
maximum security cell (no. 417), which measures 2m (width) x 3m (length)
approximately. A net in the window prevents light from coming in. Leaving aside work
hours, she is allowed to leave her cell one hour to access the yard, which has a net roof.
The situation of confinement and lack of suitable exercise in the open air has a negative
impact on her physical condition, including stiffness in the muscles and eyesight problems.

Interference with intimacy: According to Ms. Txapartegi, guards never knock at the door
before entering the cell, creating a situation of continuous stress and discomfort (to someone diagnosed with post traumatic stress disorder), particularly given that the toilet is
only separated from the other part of the cell by a curtain.
Restrictions to communications and visits by family members: Ms. Txapartegi is
allowed to see her daughter, who was recently diagnosed with a rare degenerative muscular
illness, one hour per week. Communications and contact with the outside world are also
severely restricted. She can call once a week for 10 minutes (on the telephone with her
daughter she is only allowed to speak German – not her mother tongue, which is Basque –
under the surveillance of a guard) and receive visitors once a week. OMCT recalls that the
disruption of links with families and especially their children can cause immense worry
and distress to women, all the more if they are the primary carers of their children. To
counterbalance disadvantages faced by women detained, soft law international standards
recommend women prisoners be given the maximum possible opportunity and facilities to
meet with their children (Rules 26 and 52(3) of the Bangkok Rules), taking into account
the best interests of children and the well-being of the mother. In the particular case of Ms.
Txapartegi, the lack of contact with the outside world, with no effort being made by the
prison authorities to facilitate the links with her child and family, has a direct impact on the
mental wellbeing of Ms. Txapartegi and her daughter, and raises serious concern about the
compliance of the prison authorities with international standards.

Access to medical services: There are no medical services available at night, not even in
case of emergency. Psychological support is very limited and there is no expertise nor
specialized treatment available to cater to the needs of Ms. Txapartegi as a trauma victim,
contrary to Rule 7 of the Bangkok Rules. On 2 May 2017, after having reported pain in the
breast and lower back to the doctor, Ms. Txapartegi was transferred to a hospital for a
gynaecological checkup. The gynecologist (female), with her two assistants and two
female police officers present, started asking questions to Ms. Txapartegi, who had
shackled hands and feet. She told the doctor she was not feeling comfortable to speak with
four persons in the room. She flagged to the doctor that she had been tortured and raped,
and asked her to resume the visit without the presence of the two police officers, a request
which was denied. Thereafter, the doctor performed a breast palpation exam, with the two
assistants and the two police officers standing and overseeing everything. When the
gynecologist wanted to proceed to the vaginal examination, she felt deeply humiliated and
the situation led her to revive the memories of the rape, which prompted a nervous
breakdown. The medical examination had to be interrupted at this point. Back in the
prison, she burst into tears and vomited. Ms. Txapartegi was severely retraumatised with
immense distress after that, requiring psychiatric treatment to recover. Once more, the
situation described illustrates a total lack of sensitivity towards women who have been
victims of gender-based violence. The facts as portrayed not only disclose a failure to
safeguard the privacy, dignity and confidentiality of medical examinations, but illustrate a
total lack of sensitivity towards women who have been victims of gender-based violence
(cfr. 11(1)(2) Bangkok Rules).

II) Conditions of detention (collective dimension)

Women prisoners’ unequal access to services and rights: Multiple elements indicate
that the Zürich prison and its regime have been designed and developed with the needs of
the majority male prison population in mind. Women deprived of liberty are placed in the
same annexes as male prisoners with psychiatric problems and transgender prisoners.
Moreover, women prisoners are offered less activities than men (e.g. they cannot take
German lessons or play sports like men do, except ping-pong) and work assignments are,
unlike men prisoners, limited to household chores (cleaning floors, doing laundry,
cooking), reflecting gender stereotypes and discriminatory practices (see Rule 42 (1) of the Bangkok Rules: “Women prisoners shall have access to a balanced and comprehensive
programme of activities which take account of gender-appropriate needs”). OMCT
believes affirmative action need to be taken by the prison administration to ensure that
women prisoners have equal access to all services and rights that male prisoners enjoy, and
are accorded additional rights and given access to other services and facilities, which
respond to their gender-specific needs.
Obligation to work: Although the opportunity to work is presented as voluntary, women
deprived of liberty with no external financial sources have no option but to work, against
Rule 116 of the Mandela Rules, on an daily rate ranging between 5 and 7 CHF, in order to
buy hygienic products and pay visits to the doctor. In addition, working constitutes the
only possibility to exit the cell leaving aside the one hour alloted.

Hygienic needs: Women do not have free-of-charge access to sanitary products, which
raises doubts as to whether gender specific needs (hygiene, healthcare needs) are being
met. In this regard, the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) considers that the failure to provide basic
necessities, such as sanitary pads, especially in the case of women who are menstruating,
who are going through menopause or who are pregnant, can amount to degrading treatment
or can evolve into it (see also Rule 5 of the Bangkok Rules: “Women prisoners shall have
facilities and materials required to meet women’s specific hygiene needs”).

Male staff: At night and on the weekends there are no female guards. Recognising the
vulnerability of women to sexual abuse, Rule 81 of the Nelson Mandela Rules mandates
that “no male staff member shall enter the part of the prison set aside for women unless
accompanied by a woman staff member”. The exclusive presence of male staff in the night
shift and on the weekends contravenes international standards, exposing women to a
heightened risk of abuse (and retraumatisation for those with a background of sexual abuse
such as Ms. Txapartegi). In this setting, it is particularly worrying that this prison recently
advertised for jobs and expressly stated that it prefers male applicants. OMCT calls on the
CNPT to make recommendations to bring such practices to an end.

In light of the aforementioned concerns, the International Secretariat of the OMCT kindly
calls on the CNPT to verify the facts reported by promptly conducting a visit to the Zürich
Prison, to interview Ms. Nekane Txapartegi and other inmates held in the same unit, and to
make recommendations accordingly with a view to:

1) guaranteeing the physical and psychological integrity and dignity of Ms. Nekane
Txapartegi, catering to her needs as a torture victim. OMCT considers that there is a high
and serious risk of Ms. Txapartegi suffering irreparable harm if her detention continues,
especially in the circumstances described above, which are causing her severe distress and
anxiety. Various coercive non-custodial measures would be suitable to replace her
detention, and any alternative should be developed taking into account gender-specific
needs, the history of Ms. Nekane Txapartegi’s re-victimization and her caretaking
responsibilities (see Rules 45 and 57 of the Bangkok Rules).

2) improving detention conditions and guaranteeing the personal integrity and dignity of all
women deprived of liberty in Zürich Prison and in general all persons deprived of liberty in
this and all other Swiss prisons, pursuant to Article 3 of the European Convention on
Human Rights and Articles 7 and 10 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights.







We hope that the concerns expressed in this letter will receive the attention they deserve,
remaining at your disposal for any further information you may require, whether by e-mail,
telephone or in person.

Your sincerely,

Gerald Staberock Secretary General
World Organisation Against Torture 