Philippines:  Killing of Ms. Elisa Badayos and Mr. Eleuterio Moises
December  1, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2017 / DecemberPhilippines: Killing of Ms. Elisa Badayos and Mr. Eleuterio Moises​PHL 002 / 1217 / OBS 116Murder /
Murder attempt 
Philippines
December 1,
2017
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in the Philippines.
 
Brief
description of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the killing of Ms. Elisa Badayos, Coordinator of the human rights organisation Karapatan in Negros
Oriental, and Mr. Eleuterio Moises, member of the
local peasant organisation Mantapi Ebwan Farmers’ Association, as well as about
the shooting at Ms. Carmen Matarlo, Coordinator of the youth organization Kabataan Partylist in
Cebu, as they were investigating land rights abuses in Bayawan, Negros
Oriental province.
 
According
to the information received, on November 28, 2017, at around 11 am, a 30-member fact-finding
mission led by Ms. Elisa Badayos arrived in Barangay San Ramon, Bayawan city,
to
investigate alleged land rights abuses in the area[1].
Upon their arrival, they were blocked and harassed by around five
or six individuals who reportedly belonged to the private “army” of Bayawan
Mayor Pryde Henry Teves and used by the Gaudiels, a powerful landlord family in
the area and known allies of Mayor Teves. The armed men inquired
as to the destination
and the purpose of the mission, while aiming
their shotgun at the team’s vehicle. The team was eventually allowed to proceed.
 
At
around 2:30 pm on the same day, the investigating team split, and while one
group continued to conduct interviews and case documentation, a second group left to go to
Nangka Barangay Hall, Bayawan city, to file a police report at the local
station to denounce the harassment the fact-finding team had been victims of
earlier. This groups was composed of: Ms. Elisa Badayos, Ms. Carmen Matarl, Mr. Patrick
Torres, Executive Director of Farmers Development Center (FARDEC) in Cebu,
Mr. Eleuterio Moises, and Mr. Angel Trocio, member of the Women’s
Resource Center in the Visayas.
 
About 10 minutes later, Ms.
Elisa Badayos, Mr. Eleuterio Moises, and Ms. Carmen Matarlo, who were all riding the same
motorcycle, were shot at by unknown men on another motorcycle. Ms. Elisa
Badayos and Mr. Eleuterio Moises were pronounced dead on arrival at the Bayawan
hospital. Ms. Carmen Matarlo, who sustained gunshots wounds at her shoulder, was
brought to Bayawan District Hospital before being transferred to Dumaguete. She
is now in stable condition.
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the killing of Ms. Elisa Badayos and Mr.
Eleuterio Moises, as well as the attempted murder against Ms. Carmen Matarlo, which seems to
have targeted them because of their legitimate human rights activities, in a
context of increasing insecurity for human rights defenders in the Philippines.
In particular, President Duterte has repeatedly threatened to kill human rights
defenders. The latest such instance was on August 16, when he suggested that
human rights activists were “obstructing justice” and urged police to “shoot
them”[2].
 
The Observatory calls upon the authorities in the Philippines to
immediately order an impartial, independent, transparent, and effective
investigation into the murder of Ms. Elisa Badayos and
Mr. Eleuterio Moises as well as into the shooting of Ms. Carmen Matarlo, and to
guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of all
human rights defenders in the country.
 
Background information:
 
Armed
individuals have reportedly been deployed in the area of Barangay
San Ramon since 2015 and have been responsible for various
incidents of harassment and threats against farmers and peasant organisations
that support the peasants’ claims over their land rights. 
 
The
land guarded by those armed individuals covers more than 100 hectares and is an
area that the Gaudiel family reportedly plans to grab. According to locals, the
Gaudiels presented a tax declaration proving that they had claims to the land,
but no title was presented because the land has long been classified as public.
The area has been declared “alienable and disposable” by the Department of
Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), which means farmers can apply to till
the land.
 
When
the Gaudiels first claimed ownership over the land, farmers and organisations
sought the help of the Department of Agrarian Reform (DAR) to facilitate its
distribution and place the land under the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program
(CARP). Despite the land being clearly declared publicly owned, the Gaudiels
continue to cordon the land by putting in armed individuals to guard the
premises and intimidate the peasant community in the area. The residents
however have refused to leave. 
 
Ms.
Elisa Badayos along with several other organisations started investigating
abuses and organised the peasant community in the area to oppose land grabbing
and claim their land rights.
 
Actions
requested:

Please write to the authorities in the Philippines urging them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the
physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Carmen Matarlo, Mr. Patrick Torres, Mr. Angel
Trocio, all members of the mission they were belonging too as well as all
human rights defenders in the Philippines;
 
ii.
Order an immediate, impartial, independent, transparent, and effective investigation
into the murder of Ms. Elisa Badayos and Mr. Eleuterio Moises, as
well as into the shooting at Ms. Carmen Matarlo, in order to identify
those responsible, bring them before an independent tribunal, and apply them
the sanctions provided by the law;
 
iii. Provide adequate reparation and compensation to
the relatives of Ms. Elisa Badayos and Mr. Eleuterio Moises;
 
iv.
Put an end to all acts of harassment and intimidation against all human rights defenders in the Philippines, and ensure that
they are able to carry out their activities without hindrances;
 
v.
Comply with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular its
Articles 1 and 12.2;
 
vi.
More generally, ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights instruments
ratified by the Philippines.
 
Addresses:


·    
H.E. Rodrigo
Duterte, President of the Republic of the Philpinnes, Fax: (+632) 742-1641 / 929-3968,
E-mail: op@president.gov.ph or
send message through http://president.gov.ph/contact-us/
·    
Hon. Jesus Dureza,
Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process, Fax: +63 (2) 638 2216, Email: stqd.papp@opapp.gov.ph, feedback@opapp.net
·    
Ret. Maj. Gen. Delfin
Lorenzana, Secretary, Department of National Defense, Fax: +63(2)
982-5600, Email: info@dnd.gov.ph, webmaster@dnd.gov.ph
·    
Hon. Vitaliano
Aguirre, Secretary, Department of Justice, Fax: (+632) 521-1614,
Email: communications@doj.gov.ph
·    
Hon. Jose Luis
Martin Gascon, Chairperson, Commission on Human Rights, Fax: (+632)
929 0102, Email: chairgascon.chr@gmail.com
·    
H.E. Mr. Evan P. Garcia, Ambassador,
Permanent Mission of the Philippines to
the United Nations Office in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 716
19 32 
Email: mission@genevapm.ph

·    
Embassy of the Philippines in
Brussels, Belgium, Fax: (+32) 02 345 64 25, E-mail: brusselspe@gmail.com
 
Please
also write to the embassy of the Philippines in your respective country.
 
***
Geneva-Paris,
December 1, 2017
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme
is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human
rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights
Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·    
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·    
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25
18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·    
Tel
and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29




[1] A three-day fact-finding mission was
held in different areas in Bayawan, Negros Oriental province, from November 26
to 28, 2017, to investigate reports of human rights violations in the area, in
light of harassment incidents perpetrated by members of the private army of a
political clan in the said community.


[2] See Observatory Press Release
“Extrajudicial killings and attacks against human rights defenders surge under
Duterte”, issued on September 8, 2017. 