Joint statement to the Human Rights Council: To reinforce the rights of the children in the work of the HRC.
September 25, 2006
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Events / 2006 / SeptemberJoint statement to the Human Rights Council: To reinforce the rights of the children in the work of the HRC.Human Rights Council 2nd session  Geneva, september 25, 2006  joint statement of:   World Organisation Against Torture  Save the Children Alliance  International Alliance of Women  Plan International  World Movement of Mothers  Defence for Children International  Women's World Summit Foundation  International Federation of Social Workers  World Vision International  ECPAT International  World Union of Catholic Women’s Organisations   Mr. Chairman, Members of the Council,  We, the World Organisation Against Torture, Save the Children Alliance, International Alliance of Women, Plan International, World Movement of Mothers, Defence for Children International, Women's World Summit Foundation, World Vision International, ECPAT International, World Union of Catholic Women’s Organisations and International Federation of Social Workers look forward to working alongside the Council to strengthen human rights and child rights standards worldwide.  Whilst conscious of the need to mainstream children’s rights into the entire human rights system, we feel that children have specific needs and concerns that necessitate the adoption of an explicit children’s rights focus by the Council. The World Conference on Human Rights, in its 1993 Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, reiterated the principle of “first call for children” and stated that “the rights of the child should be a priority in the United Nations system-wide action on human rights”. Thus the Convention of the Rights of the Child (CRC) should be highlighted in the work of the Council. We very much hope that the Council will assert its commitment to child rights in its future sessions by ensuring that the agenda includes a separate point dealing with child rights.  This statement is our call for action by the Council on four specific child rights issues. The areas of grave concern include 1) violence against children, 2) sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, 3) children affected by armed conflict and displacement and 4) children in conflict with the law. We strongly encourage the Council to implement our call for action.  We trust that the Human Rights Council will ensure meaningful and substantive participation of children’s rights NGOs and other independent human rights institutions for children’s rights in the work of the Council including consultations during the universal periodical review. We also look forward to the innovative creation of a specific space to allow children themselves to participate in the work of the HRC.   We finally feel it is vital that the special procedures are maintained and strengthened and include the CRC and its Optional Protocols in their mandates.  We are following with great interest the current discussions and negotiations and trust that this letter and its content will be considered by you, Members of the Council.  Thank you Mr. Chairman  Child Rights Information Network shares the view contained in this statement. 