India:  Death in detention of Mr. Safiqul Haque and acts of intimidation and judicial harassment against his family
June 28, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / India / 2013 / JuneIndia: Death in detention of Mr. Safiqul Haque and acts of intimidation and judicial harassment against his family 

Case IND 280613
Allegations of torture and ill-treatment/ Arbitrary detention/ Judicial
harassment/ Death in detention/ No proper investigation/ Risk of impunity
 
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in India/
West Bengal.
 
Brief
description of the situation
 
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been
informed by Banglar Manabadhikar Suraksha Mancha (MASUM), a member of OMCT
SOS-Torture Network, about acts of intimidation and judicial harassment against
the family of Mr. Safiqul Haque, a 51 year-old man from Bilbari Village,
after the family lodged a complaint alleging that Mr. Safiqul Haque had died in
detention due to torture and lack of proper medical care. OMCT is particularly
concerned about the arrest and alleged false charges brought against his son,
Mr. Rafikul Alam, 22 year-old, and the lack of proper investigation into
the death in detention of Mr. Safiqul Haque. 
 
According to the information received, Mr. Safiqul Haque’s family has
been continuously threatened by the Nabagram police after lodging a complaint
in relation to the death in detention of Mr. Safiqul Haque (see background information hereunder).
In a recent event, on 11 May 2013, at about 5:00 am, the Officer in charge of
Nabagram Police Station, along with other 12 policemen, entered Mr. Safiqul
Haque’s family house and arrested without any arrest warrant Mr. Rafikul Alam,
son of Mr. Safiqul Haque, after the family refused to sign on blank papers. Mr.
Rafikul Alam was illegally detained during two days. During his detention, he
allegedly suffered verbal abuses, repeated threats and intimidation. He was
also allegedly deprived of adequate food and proper sleep. 
 
On 13 May 2013, Mr. Rafikul Alam was reportedly falsely charged in
Nabagram Police Station Case no. 20/2013 under sections 147 (punishment for
rioting), 148 (armed with deadly weapon), 149 (member of unlawful assembly
guilty of offence committed in prosecution of common object), 332 (voluntarily
causing hurt to deter public servant from his duty) and 353 (assault or
criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty) of Indian
Penal Code and Section 3 of Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act, 1984.
According to the same information, on 14 May 2013, Mr. Rafikul Alam’s mother
lodged a written complaint to denounce the aforementioned events before the
District Magistrate. To date, there has been reportedly no investigation
carried out into the aforementioned events. 
 
Background information 
 
According to the same information received, on 7 December 2012 at about
5:00 pm, Mr. Safiqul Haque was praying at Bilbari Boro Mosque, in Bilbari
Village, when he was apprehended, together with Mr. Ismail Seikh, Mr. Jarman Seikh
and Mr. Anawar Hossan, by
Superintendent of Police of Murshidabab district, Mr. Humayun Kabir, who came
with about 500 police personnel. The police entered the mosque and started
brutally assaulting Mr. Safiqul Haque and his acquaintances. Mr. Safiqul Haque,
Mr. Ismail Seikh, Mr. Jarman Seikh and Mr. Anawar Hossan were reportedly tied
and dragged by force to the police prison vans parked outside the mosque, where
they were again beaten and verbally abused. 
 
On 8 December 2012, Mr. Safiqul Haque’s wife reportedly received a phone
call from an unknown person who informed her that her husband, together with
Mr. Ismail Seikh and Mr. Jarman Seikh, had been brought to Lalbagh Court
accused of murder. She went to Lalbagh Court where she found out that her husband
and the two men were detained in the court lock up and that they had been
tortured during the whole night by the police personnel who beat them with
their boots and with wooden sticks. After rejection of their bail petition on 8
December 2012, Mr. Safiqul Haque, Mr. Ismail Seikh and Mr. Jarman Seikh were detained
in Bhagwangola Police Station until 12 December 2012 when they were brought to
the Additional Second Court Special Judge, Berhempur and implicated in the
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act (NDPS) case 1117/12. Mr. Safiqul
Haque esd then moved to Bharampur Central Correctional Home where his family
was not allowed to visit him. The police personnel allegedly tortured Mr. Safiqul
Haque again during this detention causing him several injuries. 
 
According to the same information, it was not till 7 January 2013 when
Mr. Safiqul Haque was admitted to the Berhempur Sub-District Hospital to be
treated from the injuries inflicted. Despite the advise of the doctor to move
him to Kolkata Hospital for better treatment, the officials in charge did not
do so. On 7 January 2013 Mr. Safiqul Haque reportedly died in Berhempur
Sub-District Hospital without getting any proper treatment. The police did not
inform Mr. Safiqul Haque’s family about his death. On 11 January 2013, Mr. Safiqul
Haque’s wife lodged a complaint before the district Magistrate, in Murshidabad.
On 14 February 2013 MASUM made a complaint to the National Human Rights
Commission. However, to date, no action has been taken and there has been
reportedly no investigation carried out into the aforementioned events. As for
Mr. Ismail Seikh, Mr. Jarman Seikh and Mr. Anawar Hossan, they have been
released on bail. 
 
The International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its
concern about the safety and physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Safiqul Haque’s family, particularly of his son, Mr. Rafikul Alam. OMCT is also gravely concerned
about the circumstances surrounding the detention and death in detention of Mr.
Safiqul Haque. OMCT urges the competent
authorities to guarantee Mr. Safiqul Haque’s family physical and psychological
integrity at all times, notably by immediately putting in place adequate
protection measures for them, and by suspending the police personnel believed
to be responsible for the allegations of torture and ill-treatment, pending an
investigation. 
 
OMCT recalls that the authorities have to fulfil their
obligations under
the Indian Constitution and under international human rights law to
protect the right to life, the right not to be subjected to torture or other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and the right to liberty
and security, to consider seriously any allegations of ill-treatment and
arbitrary arrest, and to undertake a prompt,
effective, thorough, independent and
impartial investigation in this
regard, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and
apply adequate sanctions. OMCT also recalls that victims must be ensured the
right to an effective remedy for the human rights violations suffered as well
as the right to full redress, including compensation and rehabilitation. 
 
Action requested
 
Please write to the authorities in India
urging them to:
Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological
     integrity of Mr. Safiqul Haque’s family, particularly of
     his son, Mr. Rafikul Alam; Immediately
     put in place adequate protection measures for the family of Mr. Safiqul
     Haque;Immediately
     put an end to acts
     of intimidation and judicial harassment against the family of Mr. Safiqul
     Haque;Carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial
     investigations into the alleged acts of ill-treatment, arbitrary detention
     and alleged false charges against Mr. Rafikul Alam, Mr. Ismail Seikh and Mr. Jarman Seikh and into the death in custody of
     Mr. Safiqul Haque, the result of
     which must be made public, in order to bring those responsible before a
     competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil
     and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;Ensure that adequate, effective and prompt reparation including
     adequate compensation and rehabilitation is granted to Mr. Safiqul Haque’s family, Mr. Rafikul Alam, Mr.
     Ismail Seikh and Mr. Jarman Seikh;Guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms
     throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international
     human rights standards.
Addresses
Ø 
Mr. Shri Manmohan Singh, Prime Minister of India, Prime Minister’s Office, Room number 152, South Block, New Delhi, India.
Fax: + 91 11 2301 6857. E-mail: pmosb@pmo.nic.in / manmo@sansad.in;

Ø  Mr. Sushil Kumar Shinde,
Union Minister of Home Affairs, Ministry
of Home Affairs, 104-107 North Block, New Delhi 110 001 India, Fax: +91 11 2309
2979; 
Ø  Justice Altamas
Kabir, Chief Justice of India, Supreme Court, Tilak Marg,
New Delhi -1, India. Fax: +91 11 233 83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.in;  
Ø 
Justice K. G. Balkrishnan,
Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission of India, Faridkot House,
Copernicus Marg, New Delhi 110 001, India. Fax: +91 11 2334 0016 / 2338 4863,
Email: covdnhrc@nic.in; ionhrc@nic.in;

Ø  Justice Asok Kumar Ganguly, Chairperson, West Bengal Human Rights Commission,
Bhabani Bhaban, Alipur, Kolkata -27. Fax +91 33 2479 9633 / 2479 7750, Email: wbhrc8@bsnl.in
Ø  Governor, West Bengal, Raj Bhaban, Kolkata – 62, Phone: +91 33-2479 7259,
Fax: +91 33 2479 9633 / 2479 7750, Email: secy-gov-wb@nic.in
Ø 
Miss Mamata Banerjee, Chief
Minister, Government of West Bengal, Writers’ Buildings, BBD Bagh, Kolkata – 1,
Fax - +91 33 22145480, Email: cm@wb.gov.in, sechome@wb.gov.in; 
Ø  H.E. Mr. Dilip
Sinha, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of
India to the United Nations (Geneva), Rue du Valais 9, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland. Tel: +41 22 906 86 86, Fax: +41 22 906 86 96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy
of India in your respective country.
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
 
Geneva, 28 June 2013 