Angola:  José Marcos Mavungo's sentence is arbitrary and must be nullified
September 21, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Angola / 2015 / SeptemberAngola: José Marcos Mavungo's sentence is arbitrary and must be nullified


JOINT PRESS RELEASE

 
Angola: José
Marcos Mavungo's sentence is arbitrary and must be nullified
 
Paris-Geneva, September 21, 2015 - The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders (FIDH-OMCT) and the Associação Justiça, Paz e Democracia
(AJPD) strongly condemn the sentencing
of human rights defender José Marcos Mavungo to six years in prison. Mr.
Mavungo is a former member of “Mpalabanda”, a civic group that was banned after
it produced reports highlighting rights abuses by security forces in oil-rich
but poverty-racked Cabinda province.
 
On September
14, 2015, the Cabinda Provincial Court convicted Mr. José Marcos Mavungo
to six years' imprisonment on charges of “rebellion”. The latter was accused of
being involved in the organisation of a demonstration and being associated with
a group of men allegedly found with leaflets and explosives on the eve of the
demonstration.

 
“José Marcos Mavungo is another victim of Angola's
methods of manufacturing vulnerability. Judicial harassment and unfair trials
are often used methods by the 
authorities that do not tolerate dissent. This situation must come to an
end and    Angola must commit to its
obligation to respect and promote the rights to freedom of expression, opinion
and peaceful assembly”, our organisations
said today. 
 
Mr. Mavungo
was arrested on March 14, 2015 for helping out on organising a peaceful
demonstration promoting human rights and denouncing bad governance in Cabinda
province. He was initially charged with “sedition” but the court found no
evidence to indict him and ordered further investigations. On May 27, 2015, he
was formally charged with “rebellion”, but was only informed of his indictment
on June 22. His trial started on August 25, and was marred with several
irregularities. For example, no evidence of his relationship with the
above-mentioned individuals or of his involvement in the production of the
leaflets were presented during the trial.
 
This
conviction came only
days after the European Parliament adopted a resolution calling on Angola's
authorities to release all human rights defenders, including Mr. Mavungo, and
to drop all charges against them. In June, sixteen individuals were arrested
under similar charges in the country[1].
 
Human rights defenders and journalists generally remain
exposed to judicial harassment, acts of intimidation, threats and other
restrictions to their freedom of association and expression in Angola, as
documented in a recent Observatory fact-finding mission report[2]. 
 
The Observatory and AJPD urge Angola's authorities to
immediately and unconditionally release Mr. José Marcos Mavungo as well as all
human rights defenders arbitrarily detained in Angola.
 
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in
1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective
of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression
against human rights defenders.
 
For more
information, please contact:
• FIDH: Arthur Manet: + 33143552518
• OMCT:
Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: +41228094924
•
AJPD: Maria Lúcia da Silveira: +244923552478
 



[1]           
See Observatory Urgent Appeal AGO 001 / 0615 / OBS 053.


[2]           
The report is available for download on FIDH and OMCT websites: https://www.fidh.org/IMG/pdf/angola_obs_eng_19_mars_2015_ok.pdf
            http://www.omct.org/human-rights-defenders/reports-and-publications/angola/2015/03/d23045/. 