Guatemala:  Guatemalan activist Samayoa receives human rights award from national Ombudsman
November  4, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Guatemala / 2016 / NovemberGuatemala: Guatemalan activist Samayoa receives human rights award from national Ombudsman
 Geneva,
4 November 2017 (OMCT) – Claudia
Samayoa, member of the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) General Assembly and Coordinator of the Unidad de Protección a Defensoras
y Defensores de Derechos Humanos (UDEFEGUA), yesterday received a human
rights award from Guatemala’s Ombudsman. 
Ms. Samayoa, who founded the NGO
promoting and protecting human rights defenders in Central America, regularly threatened
to “pay for the consequences” of her work because of her outspoken position to
protect human rights defenders in her country and in the region. She received
the “National Human Rights Prize of the Myrna Mack Chang Order”, from the National Human Rights Institution (PDH) Attorney
General Jorge de León Duque.
In a country that reached a record high of
810 cases of attacks against human rights defenders in 2014, this is a welcome sign from the institution and recognition
for the landmark work done by Ms. Samayoa, who calls for
legislative reforms to stop criminalizing public demonstrators and for policies
to better protect human rights defenders in the country. 
“No one deserves this prize more than
her; it reminds us of the fundamental value of her work on the ground,” said
Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General. “The world needs more to recognize
more people like her.”
When visiting Guatemala in 2014, United Nations Deputy
High Commissioner for Human Rights Flavia Pansieri acknowledged Mr. De Leon
Duque’s efforts to strengthen the PDH, a turn-to institution for citizens to
turn to when they feel their human rights have been violated. 
The award granted by the PDH is named
after the Guatemalan anthropologist assassinated by the Guatemalan military in
1990. Myrna’s sister Helen
Mack Chang pursued prosecution of her sister's
killers before the Inter-American Court of Human Rights. The Government
acknowledged responsibility in 2004 and has had to compensate Mack and her
family. 
The PDH award was instituted in 2014,
when it went to Augusto Willemsen for his fight to promote the rights of
indigenous peoples. Last year, the award went to José Ruben Zamora, the founder
of two Guatemalan newspapers who has been threatened and attacked for his work.

For inquiries
on Guatemala, please contact mmz@omct.org; for media inquiries: lb@omct org.
To reach the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, please contact: Appeals@fidh-omct.org or OMCT: + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29 