Sri Lanka:  Ongoing enforced disappearance of Mr. Pattani Razeek
July  4, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Sri Lanka / 2011 / JulySri Lanka: Ongoing enforced disappearance of Mr. Pattani Razeek

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
 
New information
LKA 001 / 0210 / OBS 021.2
Enforced disappearance / Impunity / 
Obstacles to freedom of association
Sri Lanka
July 4, 2011
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International 
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), has received new information and requests 
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Sri Lanka.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the 
ongoing enforced disappearance of Mr. Pattani Razeek, Managing Trustee of the Community Trust 
Fund (CTF) and a member of the Executive Committee of the Asian Forum for Human 
Rights and Development (FORUM-ASIA), as well as about the lack of progress in 
investigations into his disappearance.
 
According to the information received, while June 25, 2011 marked 500 
days since the disappearance of Mr. Pattani Razeek, who remains missing since February 11, 2010 (See background information), the police seem to remain unwilling 
to arrest the main suspect in spite of the serious evidence 
highlighting his alleged involvement in the case.
 
Indeed, following Mr. Razeek’s disappearance, the family and CTF lodged 
several complaints with the local police. On February 16, 2010, the police filed 
a report to the Puttalam Magistrate Court, naming Mr. Shahabdeen Nowshaadh, a 
former CTF employee, as the chief suspect in Mr. Razeek’s disappearance. The 
police have evidence linking Nowshaadh to several ransom calls made to Mr. 
Razeek’s family, on Mr. Razeek’s mobile number, after his disappearance. 
However, for over a year, the police have made no attempt to apprehend and 
question Mr. Nowshaadh regarding Mr. Razeek’s disappearance. Mr. Razeek’s family 
believes that the failure to take action against Mr. Nowshaad is connected to 
his close association with an influential Government Minister from the area[1]. 

 
Yet, the Observatory welcomes the response made last week to Mr. 
Razeek family’s complaint to the National Human Rights Commission as well as 
information sent to them that the investigation had been handed over to the 
Criminal Investigation Department (CID), and hopes that this will mean that the 
main suspect will finally be apprehended and Mr. Razeek’s disappearance resolved.
 
Moreover, the Observatory is concerned that on June 16, 2011, 
management of the CTF was taken over by the Ministry of Defence with an Interim Board of Management, including a senior military 
officer, appointed to manage the organisation pending inquiry. No reason was provided for such 
measure.
 
The Observatory is deeply concerned by the non-resolution of Mr. 
Pattani Razeek’s disappearance case one year later, and by the apparent 
unwillingness of the police to arrest the main suspect in spite of the serious 
evidence highlighting the alleged involvement of Mr. Nowshaadh in the case, as well as about the interference into CTF 
management.
 
Background information:
 
Mr. Pattani Razeek was last seen in Polonnaruwa, a town in the North Central Province of 
Sri Lanka, in the afternoon of February 11, 2010. Mr. Razeek was then travelling 
together with other staff members of CTF on their way home from a mission when 
their van was intercepted by another vehicle, a white van[2]. Mr. Pattani Razeek approached the men in the white van and 
exchanged greetings with them. After talking to them for some minutes, Mr. Razeek went back to his colleagues and told them that he would continue his journey in the white van that according to him was heading to the Eastern provincial town of 
Valaichchenai, telling them that he would meet them later. 
 
On February 12, 2010, the CTF was informed by Mr. Razeek’s family that he never returned home from 
the mission. Since then, his whereabouts remain unknown.
 
On February 16, 2010, Mr. Razeek’s family was able to convince his 
mobile phone company to release some of the phone records coming from his mobile 
phone. The records revealed that a number of short calls were made from Mr. 
Razeek’s mobile phone on the evening of February 11, the day he was last seen by 
his colleagues. On February 15, 2010, a call from Mr. Razeek’s mobile phone was 
made to a CTF driver, but it was missed. When the call was returned, there was 
no answer. On the same day, a text message was sent from Mr. Razeek’s mobile 
phone to a member of his family, in which he assured that he was in 
Polonnaruwa town and that he would be coming back home soon. Since then, there 
has been no further contacts, nor responses to calls and text messages.
 
Subsequently, Mr. Pattani Razeek’s family lodged a complaint within 
the local police authorities in the city of Puttalam. They also filed a complaint with the Human Rights Commission of Sri 
Lanka. 
 
Police investigations reportedly revealed that Mr. Nowshaadh had used Mr. Razeek’s mobile phone to call his residence after the 
abduction. Moreover, Mr. Nowshaadh reportedly confirmed that he had met Mr. Razeek on February 11, 2010 
at the Jumma Mosque, Kaduruwela, Pollonaruwa, as he was traveling with 
Minister Rishad
Bathiudeen, amongst other persons.
 
On February 10, 2011, the Puttalam High Court was due to examine an anticipatory bail application made by Mr. Shahabdeen Nowshaadh[3], the main suspect in the disappearance of Mr. Razeek, but it decided to postpone the 
hearing to March 23, 2011. Mr. Nowshaadh's first application for an anticipatory bail application was first 
rejected by the Court in June 2010. He appealed the decision to the High Court and finally obtained his 
application to be heard in December 2010. The hearing was then postponed to 
February 3, 2011 and then to February 10, 2011. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Sri Lanka asking them 
to:
 
i.                     
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological 
integrity of Mr. Pattani Razeek;
 
ii.                   
Take prompt action in order to disclose the whereabouts of Mr. 
Pattani Razeek and ensure his immediate release;
 
iii.                  
Immediately order a thorough, effective and impartial investigation 
into Mr. Pattani Razeek’s enforced disappearance, the result of which must be made public, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before a 
competent and impartial tribunal and apply to them the penal sanctions provided 
by the law;
 
iv.                 
Put an end to acts of harassment against the Community Trust Fund as well as against all human rights organisations and defenders in 
Sri Lanka, so that they are able to carry out their peaceful human rights 
activities without hindrances;
 
v.                   
Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders, especially:
-   its article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the 
protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the 
national and international levels”;
-   and its article 9.5, which provides that “the State should conduct a 
prompt and impartial investigation or ensure that an inquiry takes place 
whenever there is a reasonable ground to believe that a violation of human 
rights and fundamental freedoms has occurred in any territory under its 
jurisdiction”. 
 
vi.                 
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental 
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and 
international instruments ratified by Sri Lanka.
 
Addresses:
 
President Mahinda Rajapakse, Presidential Secretariat, C/- Office of the President,Temple Trees 150, Galle Road,Colombo 3, Sri 
Lanka, Fax: +94 11 472100 / +94 11 2446657, Email: secretary@presidentsoffice.lk
Mr. Mohan Peiris, Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, 
Colombo 12, Sri Lanka, Fax: +94 11 2 436421
Ms. Chandra Ellawala, Secretary, Human Rights Commission of Sri 
Lanka, 118, Barnes Place, Colombo 07, Sri Lanka. Fax +94 2694924, Hotline +94 
2689064. Email: sechrc@slnet.lk
Mr. Mahinda Balasuriya, Inspector General Of Police (IGP), New 
Secretariat, Colombo 1, Sri Lanka. Fax no. +94 11 2 440440, Email: igp@police.lk
National Police Commission, 3rd Floor, Rotunda Towers, 109 
Galle Road, Colombo 03, Sri Lanka, Fax: +94 11 2 395867 / +94 11-2395866. E-mail: npcgen@sltnet.lk / polcom@sltnet.lk
Her Excellency Ms. Kshenuka Senewiratne, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Sri Lanka to the United Nations in Geneva, 56 
rue De Moillebeau, 5th Floor, 1211 Geneva 19, Switzerland, Fax: + 
41-22 734 90 84, E-mail: mission@lankamission.org / consulate@lankamission.org
Embassy of Sri Lanka in Brussels, 27 rue Jules Lejeune, 1050 Ixelles, 
Belgium. Tel: + 32 2 344 53 94/ + 32 2 344 55 85. Fax : + 32 2 344 67 37. Email: 
sri.lanka@euronet.be

Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Sri Lanka 
in your respective country.
 
****
Geneva-Paris, July 4, 2011.
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this 
appeal in your reply.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 

·         
Email: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·         
Tel and fax OMCT: + 41 22 809 49 39 / 41 22 809 49 
29
·         Tel and fax FIDH: +33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / 01 43 55 18 
80



[1] In his anticipatory bail application to the Puttalam Magistrates 
Court in June 2010, Mr. Nowshaadh claimed to be associated with Industries and 
Commerce Minister Rishad Bathiudeen, submitting that his arrest would cause 
irreparable harm to the Minister’s reputation and 
work. 

[2] In Sri Lanka, ‘white vans’ have been known to be the preferred 
vehicles of groups responsible for abductions and 
disappearances.

[3] According to Article 21.1 of the Bail Act, No 30 of 1997 “When any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on 
account of his being suspected of having committed, or been concerned in 
committing, a non-bailable offence he may with notice to the officer in-charge 
of the police station of the area in which the offence is alleged to have been 
committed, apply to the Magistrate having jurisdiction over the area in which 
such offence is alleged to have been committed, for a direction that in the 
event of his arrest on the allegation that he is suspected of having committed, 
or been concerned in the commission of, such offence he shall be released on 
bail”. 