Malaysia:  Malaysia: former Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim continues to be denied the permission to undergo necessary spinal surgery in Germany
June 28, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Malaysia / 2002 / JuneMalaysia: Malaysia: former Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim continues to be denied the permission to undergo necessary spinal surgery in GermanyCase MYS 280602 Denial of medical assistance  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Malaysia.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by SUARAM, a member of the OMCT network, that former Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim, who is currently being detained in Malaysia, continues to be denied the permission to undergo necessary spinal surgery in Germany.  According to the information received, Anwar Ibrahim, the former Malaysian Deputy Prime Minister, who has been sentenced to 15 years imprisonment on charges of corruption and sodomy, has been diagnosed with a serious spinal injury, reported to be the result of the beatings to which he was subjected on the night of his arrest, on September 20th, 1998, followed by delayed and inadequate medical assistance. According to Dr. Thomas Hoogland, who diagnosed Mr. Ibrahim, he reportedly needs surgery that cannot be performed in Malaysia since the necessary equipment is not available to perform the complicated operation there, leading to it being suggested that he travel to Germany to receive the treatment there. However, Mr. Mahathir, the Malaysian Prime Minister, has refused to allow Mr. Ibrahim to leave the country, even though there are guarantees that he would remain a prisoner throughout the journey and return to Malaysia following the intervention.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned about the fact that Mr. Anwar Ibrahim is being denied adequate medical attention, as proscribed by Dr. Hoogland in his medical report, which he requires as a matter of urgency. OMCT recalls that it had previously contacted the Malaysian authorites, in a letter dated April 3rd, 2001, about this case, and that one year later the situation remains the same. OMCT calls on the Malaysian authorities to allow Mr. Anwar Ibrahim to travel to Germany in order to undergo spinal surgery.   Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Malaysia urging them to:  ·	ensure that Anwar Ibrahim be given appropriate medical assistance as a matter of urgency; ·	order Anwar Ibrahim’s immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times; ·	guarantee adequate reparation to Anwar Ibrahim; ·	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	Dato' Seri Dr Mahathir bin Mohamad, Prime Minister's Office, Federal Government Administration Center, 62502 Putrajaya, MALAYSIA, Fax: +603 8888 3444, E-mail: ppm@smpke.jpm.my   ·	Datuk Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, Home Minister, Aras 13, Block D1, Parcel D, Pusat Pentadbiran Kerajaan Persekutuan, 652020 Putrajaya, Selangor, Malaysia, Fax: +603 8886 8014  Please also write to the embassies of Malaysia in your respective country.  Geneva, June 28th, 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 