Turkey:  Judicial harassment of Pinar Selek to continue after 14 years
March 22, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2012 / MarchTurkey: Judicial harassment of Pinar Selek to continue after 14 years
PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY
 
Turkey: Judicial harassment of Pinar Selek to continue after 14 
years
 
International mission of judicial 
observation
 
Paris-Geneva, March 22, 2012. The Observatory for the Protection of Human 
Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human 
Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), deplores the 
continuous judicial harassment of Turkish human rights defender Ms. Pinar 
Selek.
 
On March 7, 2012, the Twelfth Chamber of the Istanbul High Criminal 
Court examined again the criminal cases against Ms. Pinar Selek, a writer and sociologist 
who is an active defender of the rights of women, disadvantaged communities and 
the victims of discrimination, including street children and the Kurd and 
Armenian minorities. The Observatory had mandated Mr. Martin Pradel, lawyer at 
the Paris Bar (France), for the purpose of monitoring the hearing. 

 
The Observatory recalls that Ms. Selek has been subjected to an 
ongoing judicial harassment since 1998, when she was falsely accused of causing 
a bomb to explode in Istanbul’s Egyptian bazaar on July 9, 1998 and being a 
member of a terrorist organisation for that purpose, seemingly to punish her for 
denouncing human rights violations in Turkey. According to the mission that was 
sent to observe the trial, court’s investigations largely confirmed the absence 
of any bomb and attributed the explosion to a gas leak. Furthermore, the 
Observatory recalls that the defendant who had accused her during interrogation 
in 1998 had withdrawn his statement during the beginning of criminal 
proceedings. 
 
Nevertheless, though she has already been acquitted three times, on 
March 7, 2012, the General Prosecutor requested the court to sentence Ms. Selek 
to life time imprisonment. The hearing was then suspended and adjourned until 
August 1, 2012. These relentless accusations and delays in rendering justice 
seem to merely aim at sanctioning Ms. Selek for her continuing advocacy for the 
respect of human rights in Turkey.
 
“It is high time for the judiciary of the Turkish Republic to draw 
conclusions from the acquittals it issued in favour of Pinar Selek and free her 
for good from the weight of criminal accusations lying on unacceptable 
grounds”, said Martin Pradel. “This justice, which has proven its 
independence on three occasions, should be aware of the duty of truth entrusted 
to it. It must continue to resist pressures exercised by the prosecution to 
ensure that this long drawn up trial does not end with the unfair conviction of 
Pinar Selek”.
 
“While her right to the presumption of innocence was constantly 
violated, Pinar Selek was placed in preventive detention during two years. She 
was subjected to acts of torture and degrading and inhuman treatment, and after 
14 years of baseless criminal proceedings, she is forced into exile abroad, with 
an unbearable daily pressure”, added Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH 
President.

 
“It is time to end these proceedings and to come to a turning 
point in recognising the importance and legitimacy of defending the rights of 
others, especially when it concerns the rights of minorities, which may not be 
popular with everybody", concluded Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary 
General.

 
The Observatory therefore urges the Turkish authorities to 
immediately and unconditionally put an end to this 14-year long judicial 
harassment against her, which seems to be mere reprisals for her legitimate 
human rights activities. 
 
The Observatory more generally calls on the authorities of Turkey to 
conform in all circumstances to the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights as well as regional and 
international human rights instruments ratified by Turkey. 

 
For further information, please contact:
• FIDH: Karine Appy / Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 
18
• OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 39 