Cameroon:  Cameroon - Press Release: Violence Against Women
November 18, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Cameroon / 2003 / NovemberCameroon: Cameroon - Press Release: Violence Against WomenThe World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) expresses its concern  regarding violence against women in Cameroon at the 31st Session of  the UN Committee against Torture   Geneva, 17 November 2003  The UN Committee against Torture will start on 18 November 2003 its  examination of the implementation of the Convention against Torture  and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment by  Cameroon. On that occasion, the World Organisation Against Torture  (OMCT) submitted an alternative country report entitled "Violence  against Women in Cameroon" in which it expressed grave concern at  reports of violence against women at the hands of both state  officials and private individuals.   Reports show that the human rights situation in Cameroon is extremely  poor which is especially detrimental to the most vulnerable groups of  society, such as women. An analyses of the legal and socio-economic  and political status of women in Cameroon shows the link between the  high levels of  violence against women in Cameroon and their low  status in all aspects of life. OMCT noticed the persistence of gender  discriminatory provisions in several laws and the discriminatory  customary law, as well as the prejudices and stereotypical attitudes  concerning the role of women and men in the family and society. These  roles are based on the notion of the superiority of men and the  subordination of women. The low socio-economic status of women, which  is, for example, manifested by the high illiteracy rate among women  and  low representation of women in politics, leaves women more  vulnerable to violence at the public and private levels in Cameroon.   OMCT is extremely concerned about the persisting reports of torture  and ill-treatment of prisoners, by state officials, arbitrary arrests  and detention, and extra-judicial killings and the impunity with  which these human rights violations are met.   Women in detention centres are particularly subjected to gender- specific forms of torture such as rape and other forms of sexual  violence by both prison guards and other inmates. Women and men are  detained in the same cells. According to reliable reports, there are  cases in which women have been housed naked in mixed cells with men,  stripped naked, stripped naked and forced to dance, their bodies  insulted and mocked or forced to stand in the sun naked. When the  method of torture consists of rape or  sexual assault, it is less likely that the victim will complain out  of fear and shame, thus leading to the negation of this violation and  the impunity of the torturer.    Violence against women in the family is also a grave problem in  Cameroon. Often the parents of the bride are paid a "bride price" by  the husband. This has led men to  regard their wife as property for which they have paid and the men  and his family feel entitled to the physical labour of the wife. It  makes it also extremely difficult for a  woman to divorce from her husband. OMCT noted that the Government has  failed to take decisive action to combat the problem, such as passing  legislation specifically  prohibiting domestic violence abuse or training officials so that  they understand the complexities of issues surrounding this type of  abuse. Moreover, there has been no  awareness raising campaign at the Government level in order to  eliminate domestic violence against  women.    Overall, the government of Cameroon fails to protect women from  violence whether at the hands of private individuals or state  officials. OMCT's report concluded that while Cameroon has a duty  under international law to act with due diligence to prevent,  investigate, prosecute and punish all forms of violence against  women, irrespective of whether this violence is committed by public  or private individuals, this obligation has not been adequately  implemented at the national level.    For copies of the alternative report on "Violence against Women in  Cameroon" or for further information on OMCT's programme on Violence  against Women please contact Carin Benninger-Budel at  + 41 22 809  4939 or cbb@omct.org. 