Uganda:  Uganda’s Constitutional Court should repeal the Public Order Management Act as unconstitutional
December 19, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Uganda / 2013 / DecemberUganda: Uganda’s Constitutional Court should repeal the Public Order Management Act as unconstitutional

Geneva-Paris, December 19, 2013. The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders, a joint programme of OMCT and FIDH, calls upon the Uganda’s
Constitutional Court to repeal the Public Order Management Act, which restricts
freedoms of expression and peaceful assembly and further deteriorates an
already shrinking space for civil society and human rights defenders in the
country.
 
On
October 2, 2013, President Yoweri Museveni signed into law the Public Order
Management Act (POM Act), which was passed by Parliament in August and aims to
“provide for the regulation of public meetings; to provide for the duties and
responsibilities of police, organisers and participants in relation to public
meetings; [and] to prescribe measures for safeguarding public order”, instead
of giving powers to the police to protect the enjoyment of freedoms. Although
protecting public order is a legitimate concern recognised by international
instruments, the scope and nature of the restrictions provided by the POM Act
go well beyond the restrictions permitted under international and regional
human rights law and therefore contradict Uganda's international and regional
commitments.
 
“Whereas it is important to ensure law and order during
protests, the POM Act seems to be intended to stifle freedoms of association
and expression and thereby to undermine civil society working space by setting
very difficult conditions to hold public meetings, demonstrations and any form
of gathering in public places”,
said Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT). “The Constitutional Court of Uganda should therefore repeal it immediately
as unconstitutional”, he further urged.
 
The POM Act fails to establish a presumption in favour
of the exercise of the right to freedom of peaceful assembly as it fails to
recall the duty on the State to facilitate peaceful assemblies, in particular
as Article 6(3) provides that “where the authorised officer notifies the
organiser [of an assembly] or his or her agent that it is not possible to hold
a proposed public meeting on the date or venue proposed, the public meeting
shall not be held on that date or at the venue proposed”. The coincidence of two
demonstrations at the same location and time as well as an unsuitable venue can
be the basis for rejecting a notification (Article
6(1)). It is feared that these two grounds may be used abusively.
 
When
assemblies are held contrary to the Act, law enforcement authorities may stop
or prevent the holding of a “public meeting”, which is widely defined as “a
gathering, assembly, procession or demonstration in a public place or premises
held for the purposes of discussing, acting upon, petitioning or expressing
views on a matter of public interest” (Article 4 (1)), without defining the
concept of “matter of public interest”. In circumstances where a public meeting is held contrary to the Act, participants
in the meeting may be criminalised and are liable of an imprisonment not
exceeding 12 months or a fine not exceeding 480,000 Uganda shillings (about 140
€) or both (Article 10(3)). This provision seriously jeopardise the exercise of
the right to peaceful assembly, as organisers should not be subject to criminal sanctions, or
administrative sanctions resulting in fines or imprisonment.
 
In addition, the POM Act grants powers to the Inspector General of Police
(IGP) or an authorised officer "to regulate the conduct of all public
meetings in accordance with the law" (Article 3), which reintroduces Section
32 of the Police Act, which was found unconstitutional by the Constitutional
Court in the case of Muwanga Kivumbi vs.
Attorney General (Constitutional Petition No.9/2005). The Court noted that Section
32 of the Police Act required Ugandans to seek permission from the IGP before
exercising the right to demonstrate and assemble, which contradicts Article 29
of the Constitution. The POM Act therefore contradicts Article 92 of the
Constitution of Uganda, which provides that “Parliament shall not pass any law
to alter the decision or judgment of any court as between the parties to the
decision or judgment”.
 
Article
12 (1) of the POM Act grants the Interior Minister the power, subject to
Parliamentary approval, to declare any area as “gazetted” where public meetings
are absolutely prohibited.
 
Further, the POM Act prohibits public meetings at and around
public institutions by designing them as “restricted areas”, where entry is
prohibited with punishment of two years’ imprisonment and/or a fine of 960,000 Uganda shillings or both (Article 13(3)).
These areas notably include Parliament and Courts. It is also worrying that
wide-ranging and discretionary powers are given to the law enforcement
authorities to disperse spontaneous assemblies under certain vaguely defined
circumstances (Article 7(2)) and public meetings “in order to prevent violence,
restore order, and preserve the peace” (Article 9(2)(f)).
 
Accordingly,
the Observatory fears the POM Act will lead to a further deterioration of the
civic space in Uganda, and may hamper civil society actions that involve
discussions related to governance and accountability, rule of law and more
generally human rights, or anything within the spectrum of “public interest”
will only be held provided police permission and supervision is granted.
 
“The law clearly contravenes
international and regional standards, including Articles 19 and 21 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and Articles 9, 10
and 11 of the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, and also violates
Article 29 of the Ugandan Constitution that promotes and protects the rights to
freedom of expression and association. Indeed, instead of giving powers to the
police to protect the enjoyment of freedoms, this new law empowers the police
to restrict the enjoyment of rights”, said
Karim Lahidji, President of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH).
 
The Observatory further recalls the provisions of the
United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders concerning the recognition
of the right of all persons “individually and in association with others, to
participate in peaceful activities against violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms” (Article 12.1) as well as the right of all individuals to
meet or assemble peacefully (Article 5). According to Article 12.2, States
Parties should take “all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the
competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others,
against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present
Declaration”.
 
Accordingly, the Observatory calls upon the Ugandan
Government to comply with its obligations under international and regional law
to respect and protect the right of everyone in Uganda to exercise their rights
to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly by conforming provisions of the
POM Act that are contrary to the effective exercise and enjoyment of these
fundamental rights, which in turn also affect the important role of human
rights organisations and defenders in the country.
 
For further
information, please contact:
• OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39
• FIDH: Audrey Couprie: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 