Greece:  Ongoing acts of harassment against Greek Helsinki Monitor (GHM)
September 21, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Greece / 2010 / SeptemberGreece: Ongoing acts of harassment against Greek Helsinki Monitor (GHM)Greece: Ongoing acts of harassment against GHM
(Case GRE 040408.3 - Follow up of Case GRE 040408 - Human rights defenders: Judicial proceedings / Harassment)
 
Geneva,
21 September 2010
 
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) has received new information and requests
your intervention in the following situation in Greece.
 
New information:
 
The International
Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Greek Helsinki Monitor
(GHM), a member
of OMCT SOS-Torture network, about new developments in the acts of harassment
against GHM and activists who filed criminal actions against Greece’s neo-Nazis.
According
to the information received, on September 22, 2010, Ms. Anna Stai, Ms.
Rena Koutelou and Mr. Lambis Katsiapis, members of the Greek non-governmental organisation Antinazi Initiative
(Antinazistiki Protovoulia), will be tried before the Appeals Court of Athens for
dissemination of false information through the press following a complaint by
Mr. Kostas Plevris, author
of the book “The Jews: The Whole Truth”. According to the indictment, in a
poster they published on 14 January 2009 and an announcement on their website
published on 28 January 2009, the defendants claimed that Kostas Plevris is supported
by anti-Semitic prosecutors and judges, who constitute a “fascist network” in
the judicial system. 
Furthermore, on January 24, 2011, Ms. Andrea
Gilbert, Mr. Panayote Dimitras, respectively GHM's specialist on
anti-Semitism and Spokeperson and Messrs. Benjamin Albalas, Leon Gavrilidis,
Moisis Konstantinis, and Avraam Reitan, members of the Central Board of
Jewish Communities in Greece (Kentriko Israilitiko Symvoulio - KIS), will be
tried before the 6th Misdemanors Court of Athens, for false
accusations, perjury and aggravated defamation against Kostas Plevris,
following a complaint he filed in 2007.[1] 
 
The International
Secretariat of OMCT expresses its deep concern about this judicial harassment against these human rights defenders, which seems to
merely aim at sanctioning their human rights activities, in particular their
activities against discrimination and anti-Semitism in Greece.
 
The International
Secretariat of OMCT also recalls that
according to Article 12.2 of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, “the State
shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent
authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against
any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination,
pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her
legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”.
Background information:
Mr. Panayote Dimitras, testified at a trial against
the extreme-right newspaper Eleftheros Kosmos, which had published articles on
October 27, 2006 in conjunction of the anti-Semitic book by Mr. Plevris, The Jews - The whole truth (May 2006).
During Mr. Dimitras' testimony, Mr. Plevris and his lawyer verbally attacked
the witness. As soon as the testimony was finished, Mr. Dimitras was further
attacked by a journalist at the State television channel. The presiding judge
did not order the arrest of the assailant for disruption of court proceedings, 
On December 13, 2007, the Second Three-Member
Appeals Court of Athens convicted Mr. Plevris to a suspended prison sentence of
14 months for "incitation to racial violence and hatred and for racial
insults". Since the end of the trial, Mr. Dimitras has been threatened
through messages posted on the Internet forum of the LAOS youth organisation.
Furthermore, Mr. Plevris has launched
several legal actions for defamation including racist and defamatory comments
against Mr. Dimitras, Ms. Gilbert, and Messrs. Moses Konstantinis, Benjamin
Albala, Abraham Reitan and Leon Gavriilidis, who had all testified against him.

On 27 March 2009, an Athens Five-Member Appeals Court
acquitted Mr Plevris, reversing the December 2007 judgment. On 15 April 2010,
the Supreme Court rejected a motion for cassation upholding the acquittal. 
Actions required:
 
Please write to the Greek authorities, urging them to:
 
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of Ms. Anna Stai, Ms. Rena Koutelou and Mr. Lambis
Katsiapis,
Mr. Panayote Dimitras, Ms. Andrea Gilbert, and Messrs. Benjamin Albalas, Leon Gavrilidis,
Moisis Konstantinis, and Avraam Reitan; Put an end to all acts harassment, including at the
judicial level, against Ms. Anna Stai, Ms. Rena Koutelou and Mr. Lambis
Katsiapis,
Mr. Panayote Dimitras, Ms. Andrea Gilbert, and Messrs. Benjamin Albalas, Leon Gavrilidis,
Moisis Konstantinis, and Avraam Reitan, as well as all human rights defenders in
Greece;  Conform
with the provisions
of the UN Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly on December 9, 1998, especially its Article 1,
which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, as well as
above-mentioned Article 12.2; More
generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international
and regional human rights instruments ratified by Greece.
 
Addresses:
 
Mr. George Α. Papandreou, Prime Minister, Prime
Minister’s Office at the Hellenic Parliament, Greek Parliament Blgd,
Constitution Square, Athens, Greece. Fax:
+30 210 6715799, Email: pressoffice@primeminister.grMr. Dimitris Droutsas, Foreign Minister, Athens, Greece, Fax: + 30
210 3681433, Email: gpap@mfa.grMr. Charalampos Kastanidis, Minister
of Justice, Transparency and Human Rights, Athens, Greece, Fax +30 2107489231, E-mail: minjust@justice.grMr. Yorgos Kaminis, Ombudsman for Human Rights, Fax :
+30 210 7289643H.E. George J. Kaklikis, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Greece to the United Nations in Geneva, Rue du Léman 4, 1201
Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 732.21.50, Email: missionofgreece@bluewin.ch
or grdel.gva@mfa.grDiplomatic Mission of Greece to the European Union, 25
rue Montoyer, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 512 79 12 / + 32 2 551 56 51.
 
Please also write to the embassies of Greece in
your respective country. 
 
***
Geneva, September 21, 2010
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.



[1] See OMCT Press release, 3
September 2008, “Greece: Ongoing acts of harassment
against GHM-Case GRE 040408.1 - Follow up of Case GRE 040408”. 