Kyrgyzstan:  Kyrgyzstan: Arbitrary Detention and Torture of a child
May 17, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2002 / MayKyrgyzstan: Kyrgyzstan: Arbitrary Detention and Torture of a childCHILD CONCERN Case KGZ 160502.CC Arbitrary arrest and detention / Torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the Kyrgyz Republic.  Brief description of the situation:  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR), a member of the OMCT network, that on 14 May 2002 between 10:00 a.m. and 3:20 p.m., Sartov Januzakovich Ulukman, a 16 year-old child, was arbitrarily arrested and detained, following an order from Deputy Head of Department of Interior (UVD) P.N. Tyablin, and abusively interrogated by policemen from the Pervomayskiy Regional Department of Interior (ROVD) .  According to the information received, demonstrations are continuing to take place all over the Kyrgyz Republic in protest against the transfer of territory of Kyrgyzstan to China, the impunity enjoyed by the perpetrators of the Aksy tragedy (see urgent appeal KGZ 290102 and follow-ups) and demanding the resignation of President Askar Akaev. Sartov Januzakovich Ulukman, who was taking part in the demonstration in Bishkek, was arrested and transported initially to UVD of Bishkek, before being transferred to ROVD. During his arrest, he was reportedly hit in the chest, kicked in the back and pushed into a bus. While he was being transported, he was beaten up by the ROVD police forces leaving him bruised and injured. There, he was interrogated without the presence of his family by the policemen, who used death threats to obtain information concerning the organisers of the demonstrations. After more than five hours of arbitrary detention and ill-treatment, Sartov Januzakovich Ulukman was released.   According to the information received, the General Prosecutor refused to accept the plea from Sartov Januzakovich Ulukman and no measures have been taken as yet to bring the perpetrators of these human rights violations to justice.  According to information received, on 16 May 2002 two law enforcement officers visited Sartov Januzakovich Ulukman’s home and threatened his mother and younger sister in relation with this affair.  The International Secretariat of OMCT strongly condemns the Kyrgyz authorities’ use of arbitrary detention, harassment, death threats, ill-treatment and torture. In particular, OMCT wishes to recall that Kyrgyzstan, as a State party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, recognized that “No child shall be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.” (art. 37(a)) and that “Every child alleged as or accused of having infringed the penal law has at least the following guarantees: Not to be compelled to give testimony or to confess guilt.” (art. 40 par. 2(b) iv).  Action requested:  Please write to the authorities in the Kyrgyz Republic urging them to:  i.	put an immediate end to all forms of torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, and arbitrary arrests in accordance with national and international legislation; ii.	ensure physical and psychological recovery of Sartov Januzakovich Ulukman;  iii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the alleged acts of torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, and arbitrary arrest, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; iv.	guarantee respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in compliance with national laws and international standards, and particularly with the Convention on the Rights of the Child.   Addresses:   Mr Askar Akayev, President of the Kyrgyz Republic, Kyrgyzskaya Respublika, 720003 g. Bishkek, Prospekt Chuy, 205, Fax: 996 312 218 627, Email: ghpress2@rhl.bishkek.su  Mr. Kurmanbek Bakiev, Prime Minister, Fax: 996 312 218 627  Mr. Temirbek Akmataliev, Minister of the Interior, Fax: 996 312 663 031, 996 312 288 788, mail@mvd.bishkek.gov.kg  Mr. Jakyp Abdyrahmanov, Minister of Justice, Fax: 996 312 663 044, injust@bishkek.gov.kg    Please also write to the embassies of the Kyrgyz Republic in your respective country.  Geneva, 16th May, 2002  Please inform us of any action undertaken in connection with this case, quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 