Joint Open Letter to EU Authorities: Continued hostility towards human rights organisations
June  8, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2016 / JuneJoint Open Letter to EU Authorities: Continued hostility towards human rights organisationsIsrael-OTP_Joint Open Letter_2016.06.083 pages / 481 KB
Frederica Mogherini, High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy/Vice-President of the European Commission
Johannes Hahn, EU Commissioner for the European Neighbourhood Policy and Enlargement Negotiations
Heads of EU Member State Missions in Tel Aviv
High Representative Mogherini, Commissioner Hahn, Your Excellencies,
Today, 7 June 2016, the so-called “NGO Transparency Bill” may be 
brought for a final reading at the Israeli Parliament. This bill is only
 one of many other measures being taken against human rights and civil 
society organisations in Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territory 
(OPT). The bill is being advanced amidst a disturbing series of attacks 
on human rights organisations and heightened efforts aimed at silencing 
dissent. Local organisations have documented a sharp increase of arbitrary arrests and the excessive use of force against Palestinian demonstrators both in the OPT and in Israel.
As the Knesset moves toward its final vote on this bill, EuroMed 
Rights and its member organisations, as well as the Observatory for the 
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (joint FIDH-OMCT partnership), call
 on the EU to issue a firm and unambiguous statement to defend both the 
“shared values” said to underwrite its relations with Israel and civil 
society as a key partner in promoting these values.
On 8 February 2016, the “NGO Transparency Bill” passed the first of 
three readings in the Israeli Knesset. The bill singles out NGOs that 
receive more than 50% of their funding from foreign public sources – 
including the EU, EU Member States and the UN.  It would require NGOs to
 register themselves as “foreign agents” and to indicate the sources of 
their funding on all publications, public advertisements and in all 
correspondence with public representatives. This law would 
disproportionately affect human rights NGOs who conduct crucial 
monitoring and reporting activities: reportedly 25 of the 27 NGOs
 affected are human rights NGOs. This includes many EuroMed Rights, FIDH
 and OMCT members that are funded by, and regularly cooperate with, the 
EU and EU Member States and whose activities are already subject to 
stringent transparency requirements.
Meanwhile, the Israeli government has explicitly rejected
 proposals to apply similar transparency requirements to organisations 
that receive funding from private sources, including foreign private 
sources or from the Israeli State.  As a result, manyright-wing organisations
 typically not eligible for EU or EU Member State funding, due to the 
nature of their work, are exempt from these requirements. Far from 
increasing transparency, this bill will only bolster less transparent, 
privately funded organisations, while attempting to stigmatise 
organisations that promote democracy, the rule of law and respect for 
human rights.
Beyond legislative efforts to stymie the work of these NGOs, 
unprecedented smear campaigns and other forms of harassment have 
targeted human rights defenders recently. Branding Israeli human rights 
defenders as “foreign agents” and “traitors”, right-wing organisations and settler groups have launched public defamation campaigns andinfiltrated NGOs, including allegedly through private detective companies.  Although non-governmental, these right-wing organisations and their activities are often explicitly supported byIsraeli cabinet Ministers [1].
Indeed, rather than condemning such activities, public officials have
 adopted similarly inflammatory rhetoric, contributing to the already 
widespread hostility against human rights defenders. Statements by 
Israeli Justice Minister Ayelet Shaked and other Knesset members, regularly reinforce the sense that EU funding of human rights NGOs amounts to illegitimate “foreign intervention”.
NGOs are compelled to divert their time and resources away from 
addressing the human rights violations that are their primary concern, 
and instead to invest them into staving off false accusations and 
ensuring the safety of their staff.
More disturbing yet are the intimidation campaigns, threats and physical attacks against human rights defenders
 by settlers, non-state actors and possibly the Israeli authorities 
themselves. In recent months, EuroMed Rights, FIDH and OMCT members 
Al-Haq and the Al Mezan Center for Human Rights have been subjected to 
anonymous emails, phone calls and Facebook posts aimed at undermining 
their work, funding base and credibility within their communities. These
 tactics culminated in the harassment of the organisations’ staff and 
family members and death threats. The threats, which have been expressly
 linked to the organisations’ work with the International Criminal 
Court, are believed to be orchestrated by the Israeli government or its supporters.
In January 2016, B’Tselem field researcher, Nasser Nawajah, was 
detained by the Israeli Police after a popular Israeli television show 
reported that Nawajah and two other human rights defenders were 
purportedly involved in “unscrupulous activities”. These claims relied 
on information provided by right wing organisation, Ad Kan that had 
employed undercover infiltrators to monitor the work of these human 
rights defenders. After one week, Nawajah was released from custody when
 a military judge criticised the Police for failing to provide evidence 
that he was even suspected of a crime.
On 28 March 2016, the Israeli Minister Yisrael Katz called on Israel to engage in “targeted civil eliminations” of Boycott Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) leaders including Omar Barghouti.
 Portraying him as a security threat, the Israel authorities have 
officially refused to renew Barghouti’s travel document, meaning that he
 is no longer able to leave Israel. He has also reportedly been informed
 that his residency status in Israel is under review by the Minister of 
Interior. These acts and similar efforts to criminalise BDS activities 
in Europe curtail the rights of individuals to express non-violent 
opinions and to advocate for change. As previously affirmed by the EU and more recently by the Netherlands, Ireland and Sweden, such activities are protected by the right to freedom of expression and freedom of assembly.
As the EU moves to renegotiate its Partnership Priorities with 
Israel, continued support for human rights values through a vibrant 
civil society remains essential to achieving peace and stability for the
 Palestinian and Israeli people. In line with its commitments in the 2015 EU Action Plan on Human Rights and Democracy, EuroMed Rights calls on the EU and its Member States to:
 Call on Israel to withdraw the “NGO Transparency Bill” and cease the further introduction and enactment of legislation aimed at limiting the space of civil society;
 Condemn
 all threats and attacks against human rights defenders through public 
statements and demarches and ensure regular reporting by the EU Heads of
 Mission on the situation of human rights defenders in Israel and the 
OPT, providing recommendations for EU action in accordance with the EU Guidelines on Human Rights Defenders;
 Urge
 Israeli officials to refrain from issuing, inciting or supporting 
threats and/or attacks against human rights defenders and call for the 
prompt and thorough investigation of all such cases backed by criminal 
charges where appropriate;
 Call
 on Israel to issue a standing invitation and accept requests for 
country visits by all UN Special procedures, including the UN Special 
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders, the Special 
Rapporteur on freedom of expression, the Special Rapporteur on the 
rights freedom of assembly and association and the Special Rapporteur on
 the situation of human rights in the OPT as well as other visits by 
European Parliamentarians and international NGOs;
 Reaffirm
 the EU’s previous position that peaceful demonstrations and non-violent
 political opinions are protected by the right to freedom of expression,
 freedom of speech and freedom of assembly.
Yours sincerely,
Michel Tubiana, President of EuroMed Rights 
Karim Lahidji, President of  FIDH, in the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT),  in the framework of the 
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders

Footnotes
[1] In
 hyperlink, Im Tirtzu website quoting Israeli Justice Minister Ayelet 
Shaked saying: “It is our responsibility, the Members of Knesset sitting
 here and Im Tirtzu to expose the mask that these organisations [Israeli
 human right organisations], are wearing (… ) I think our goal is to 
expose these organisations, their funding, and to try to stop this 
funding” 