Bangladesh:  No proper investigation into allegations of torture and ill-treatment in police custody
July 13, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2012 / JulyBangladesh: No proper investigation into allegations of torture and ill-treatment in police custody
Case BGD 130712
Alleged
torture and ill-treatment/ Death threats/ No proper investigation/ Risk of
impunity
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Bangladesh.

Brief description of the situation
The
International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by ODHIKAR, a member of
OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the alleged torture and ill-treatment of Mr. Mohammad
Abu Reza Roni Meradona, 25 years old and owner of a business called “Auto
Mobile Servicing”, and Mr. Mohammad Habibur Rahman Habib, 21 years old
and a student, from Shrimontopur village, early 2012. OMCT is concerned that,
to date, no proper investigation has been reportedly carried out into these allegations
and that the perpetrator has not been brought to justice. 
According
to the information received, on a day between 8 January and 28 February 2012
(exact date unclear) Sub Inspector (SI) Nurujjaman Bishwas came to Mr.Mohammad Abu Reza RoniMeradona’s
shop to inquire about Mr. Shorif Hossain’s disappearance that occurred on 7
January 2012. This latter was Mr. Meradona’s neighbour in the village and used
to come to his shop together with Mr. Mohammad
Habibur Rahman Habib as they were studying in the city. Mr. Meradona
reportedly told the Sub Inspector that they had not been in contact any more. He
was taken to the Magura Sadar Police Station twice in these two months, where
he was slapped and kicked for two days and questioned about Mr. Hossain. After
those two days, he gave a bribe of 5000 taka to SI Nurujjaman and signed a bond
to be released. 
According
to the same information, on 29 February 2012 around 11 pm, SI Nurujjaman came
back to Mr. Mohammad Abu Reza RoniMeradona’s
house. After waking up his parents and brother, Mr. Mohammad Abu Reza RoniMeradona was handcuffed and dragged to
a nearby police van, without being informed of the reasons for his arrest. Mr.
Meradona did not ask for these reasons either as, according to the bond he had
signed before, he was obliged to be present at the police station when called
upon. Mr. Meradona’s father reportedly gave SI Nurujjaman a bribe of 5000
taka’s to prevent his son from being tortured, upon which the SI told him to
come to Magura Sadar Police Station the next morning. The police van then drove
to Mr. Habib’s residence, where he was picked up as well around 11.30 pm. Mr.
Habib was handcuffed and informed by the SI that he was arrested as a suspect
in the missing of Mr. Hossain. The van went subsequently to the Magura Sadar
Police Station where Mr. Meradona and Mr. Habib were kept all night. 
On 1
March 2012 around 8 am Mr. Meradona was reportedly blindfolded and taken to
another room by SI Nurujjaman, where he was handcuffed to the window grill. The
SI beat him with a stick on different parts of his body, including his legs,
back and both arms, while he kept questioning Mr. Meradona about the
disappearance of Mr. Hossain. Around 9 am Mr. Meradona’s father came in the
room where he saw his son being beaten up, and asked the SI to stop. SI
Nurujjaman however called the sentry and ordered his removal from the police
station. When Mr. Meradona’s father came back, he gave the SI another bribe of
2500 taka’s to request for Mr. Meradona’s release, but was removed from the
police station. Mr. Habib’s brother also went to the police station that same
day, where he saw that his brother and Mr. Meradona were beaten while being
questioned about Mr. Hussain.  
When Mr.
Meradona refused to give a false confession to the SI, the latter allegedly threatened
him by saying that he might die in crossfire. Later that same day, Mr. Meradona
and Mr. Habib were brought to Magura District Jail. When entering they were
asked if they had been tortured, but they denied. According to Mr. Meradona and
Mr. Habib they did not inform the prison guard about the torture out of fear,
as the SI had threatened them that they would be tortured again if they would
tell anyone about it. The next morning, on 2 March 2012, Mr. Habib’s brother went
to the District Jail where he found out that Mr. Habib was ill. He was able to
bring some medicine and give those to Mr. Habib. The prison guard stated that
he also called the doctor in the jail, and ensured their primary medical
treatment; however, the victims did not have access to a doctor outside the
jail. 
Mr. Habib
and Mr. Meradona got bail on 28 March 2012, and their case is pending before
the Chief Judicial Magistrate Court. They have access to a lawyer of their own
choice, and the next hearing is set on 23 August 2012. 
According
to the same information received, on 4 March 2012 an application was filed on
behalf of Mr. Meradona and Mr. Habib before the Division Bench of the High
Court Division of the Supreme Court seeking redress. The court reportedly
ordered the competent Bangladeshi authorities to respond to the allegations,
after which the Police Superintendant formed an investigation team of three members.
This committee reportedly submitted a primary investigation report to the Police
Superintendant, in which it found the allegations of torture to be true. However,
only a departmental case was filed against SI Nurujjaman (an inquiry within the
police department that can lead for example to a reprimand or demotion). While
this investigation is going on, the SI has been temporarily suspended and withdrawn
from the Magura Sadar Police Station. However, there are also fears that he
will just be redeployed in another police station. 
The
International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned about the alleged acts of
torture and ill-treatment inflicted upon Mr.
Meradona and Mr. Habib in police custody, and
the lack of proper investigation into these allegations. OMCT recalls that the authorities of Bangladesh have to
fulfil their obligations under
international human rights law to
protect the right not to be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment and to bringing to justice those responsible
for violating this right.
Therefore, OMCT calls on the competent
authorities to ensure that an investigation
is carried out promptly, effectively, thoroughly,
independently and impartially into these allegations, in accordance with
international human rights standards, the result of which must be made public,
in order to
identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and apply adequate
sanctions.
Action requested
Please
write to the authorities in Bangladesh urging them to:
i.              
Guarantee, in all circumstances,
the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Mohammad Abu Reza Roni Meradona
and Mr. Mohammad Habibur Rahman Habib; 
ii.             
Carry out a prompt, effective, thorough,
independent and impartial investigation into the aformentioned facts, notably the
allegations of torture and ill-treatment of Mr.
Meradona and Mr. Habib, in
accordance with international human rights standards, the result of which must
be made public, in order to bring those responsible before a competent,
independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative
sanctions as provided by law;
iii.           
Ensure
that an effective remedy, including the right to full redress with compensation
and rehabilitation, be granted to the victims
concerned;
iv.           
Guarantee
the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.

Addresses
Ø Ms. Sheikh Hasina, Prime
Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, Gona Bhaban, Old Sangsad Bhaban,
Tejgaon, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Fax: +880 2 8113243, Email: info@pmo.gov.bd
Ø Ms. Shahara Khatun, Minister
for Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat Building 4,
Dhaka, Bangladesh, Fax: +88-02-716967, Email: minister@mha.gov.bd
Ø Barrister Shafique
Ahmed, Minister for Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Ministry of
Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka,
Bangladesh, Fax: +88-02-7168557, Email: info@minlaw.gov.bd
Ø Mr.Hassan Mahmood
Khandker, Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, Phoenix Road,
Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh, Fax: +88-02-9563362, 9563363, Email: ig@police.gov.bd
Ø Ambassador Mr. Abdul Hannan,
Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh to the United Nations
in Geneva, 65 rue de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 46 16,
E-mail: mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.int
Please also
write to the embassies of Bangladesh in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 13 July
2012
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply 