Malaysia:  Malaysia: arbitrary arrest of 41 demonstrators under the ISA
July 16, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Malaysia / 2001 / JulyMalaysia: Malaysia: arbitrary arrest of 41 demonstrators under the ISACase MYS 160701  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Malaysia.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source of the arrest by the Malaysian police of 41 demonstrators, including 10 women and 31 men, under the Internal Security Act (ISA), on 15 July 2001.  According to the information received, a peaceful demonstration with more than 1500 people was held in front of the Kamunting detention camp, on July 15th, to commemorate the 100th day of detention of the political and reform activists being held under the ISA. The police intervened with water canons to put an end to the demonstration and then arrested 41 of the demonstrators, who are now being held at Taiping police station. Eyewitness accounts alleged that people were beaten with batons and dragged away into police trucks. The 41 detainees have reportedly been arrested for “illegal assembly,” and will be brought before a magistrate within 24 hours.  According to the information received, Aliza Jaafar, the wife of ISA detainee Hj. Saari Sungib, (see Urgent Appeal Case MYS 110401) was also arrested. Three persons among those arrested are teenagers, respectively aged 14, 15 and 16 years old. The detainees’ names are as follows:   Mohd Zariddin, Sulaiman bin Meor Abdul Rahman, Ahmad Sazli bin Saad, Zuraini bte Abdullah (woman), Keh Sue Yek, Rosdi bin Mohd, Osman bin Mohd, Azmi bin Ashim, Norleta bte Baharin (woman), Rahman bte Yatin (woman), Mohd Zarin Kairy bin Zainuddin, Mohd Zainur bin Osman, Aliza bte Jaafar (woman), Normah bte Che Mat (woman), Siti aminah bte Mat (woman), Ahmad Tarmizi bin Abdullah, Seok Loy, Kassim bin Yahya, Abdul Majid bin Ahmad, Redzuan bin Abdul Samad, Baharuddin bin Abdullah, Mior Johor bin Mior Abu Bakar, Mat Zahudi bin Mohd Nor, Saharuddin bin Rasak, Tajul Arifin bin Mohd Yusof, Mohd Saifianuddin bin Mohd salleh, Mohd Akhir bin Arifin, Zul Helmi bin Yahya, Mohd Azam bin Mekhtar, Mohd Lokman bin Mohd Ali, Noraini bte Mohtar (woman), Norashikin bte Baharin (14 years old), Ahmad Shahrani bin Che Azmi, Abdul Rahman bin Mohd Nor (16 years old), Atipah bte Uri (woman), Mohd Kamis bin Abdullah, Mohd Jallaludin bin Mohd Taib, Mamor bin Yahaya, Mohd Shuib bin Ismail, Abdul Ghani bin abu Yamin, Rohaida Ayu bte Arifin (15 years old).  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of all the persons arrested. OMCT also urges the Malaysian authorites to reconsider the ISA as a whole, as suggested by Shah Alam, High Court Judge and Justice Mohd Hishamudin Mohd Yunus, during recent rulings, which lead to several ISA detainees being released (see Urgent Appeal Case MYS 110401.2 on June 1st, 2001).  Action requested :  Please write to the authorities in Malaysia urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned persons;  iii.	order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses:  Ybhg Tan Sri Musa Hitam, Chairperson Malaysian Human Rights Commission, C/o Kementerian Luar Negeri, Wisma Putra, 50602 Kuala Lumpur. Fax : 603-2425043 / Email: humanrights@humanrights.com.my  Datuk Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, Home Minister, Jalan Dato Onn, 50502 Kuala Lumpur. Fax-603-2301051  Tan Sri Norian Mai, Inspector General of Police, Ibupejabat Polis Diraja Malaysia, Bukit Aman, 50560 Kuala Lumpur. Fax: 603-22731326  Please also write to the embassies of Malaysia in your respective country.  Geneva, July 16th, 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 