Sudan:  Open letter on the crackdown on peaceful protests by Sudanese government forces
February 16, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Sudan / 2018 / FebruarySudan: Open letter on the crackdown on peaceful protests by Sudanese government forces
14 February 2018
TO:
UN Human Rights Committee
UN Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention;
UN Special Rapporteur on the
promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, Mr.
David Kaye;
UN Independent Expert on the
situation of human rights in the Sudan, Mr. Aristide Nononsi
UN Special Rapporteur on the rights
to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association, Ms. Annalisa Ciampi
UN Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights defenders, Mr. Michel Forst
RE: Open letter concerning the
crackdown on peaceful protests and the wave of arbitrary arrests and continued
incommunicado detentions by Sudanese government forces
Honourable
Commissioners,
We,
the undersigned Sudanese, African and international organisations, write to you
in your capacities as Special Procedure mandate holders to draw your attention
to the worrying developments concerning the excessive use of force by Sudanese
authorities to disperse peaceful protests across Sudan. We urge you to call on
the Government of Sudan to respect the peoples’ rights to freedom of assembly,
association and expression as guaranteed in international standards and UN
treaties ratified by Sudan and refrain from using excessive force to disperse
protests.
The
Sudanese authorities’ reaction to the recent January 2018 protests is contrary
to Sudan’s commitment to respect human rights and fundamental freedoms
enshrined in regional and international treaties to which it is party. Since 7
January, the authorities, including the National Intelligence and Security
Service (NISS) and police have beaten peaceful protestors with sticks and
batons and fired tear gas and live ammunition into crowds. On 7 January, in El
Geneina, West Darfur one student was killed and six other
students were injured after joint forces of the National Intelligence and
Security Services and Sudanese Police used live ammunition to disperse a
peaceful student march.[1]
At least 5 people were killed and 26 others sustained gunshot wounds when
joint forces of the Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) and Rapid Support Forces (RSF)
opened live ammunition on a crowd of protestors at Hasahisa camp for internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in Zalingei, Central Darfur, on 20 January.[2]
From
6 January to 6 February, the security forces have arrested and detained scores
of Sudanese citizens including opposition political party leaders, human rights
defenders/activists, journalists, student activists and others for prolonged
periods without charge or trial.[3]
We
are concerned about the prolonged detention, in most cases incommunicado, of
individuals under NISS custody feared to have been abused or at risk of abuse
as well as those of advanced age with serious health conditions. The lack of
access to lawyers and family members for the detainees, together with the
well-documented use by the NISS of torture and other forms of ill-treatment
against detainees, particularly whilst held in unknown locations, gives rise to
serious concerns for their safety.
We
are also concerned about the repeated confiscation by the Sudanese authorities
of national newspapers to prevent the coverage of the nationwide January 2018
protests, often at great cost to the newspapers. These restrictions have
indirectly caused newspapers to self-censor, limiting the availability of
information in order not to cross “red lines”. Censorship is often ramped up
around key events with post-print censorship, whereby entire print-runs of
daily editions are confiscated prior to morning distribution. Authorities also
tightened restrictions to prevent coverage of the nationwide
anti-austerity protests in 2013, in April 2015, to prevent
coverage of an
elections boycott by opposition parties and again in
November 2016 to prevent coverage of the
civil disobedience campaign protesting anti-austerity measures introduced
in early November.
The
January 2018 incidents are the latest examples of an ongoing pattern of abuse.
In September 2013 government forces used live ammunition to disperse peaceful
protests, killing more than 170
protesters and detaining at least 800 protesters without charge.
Many of those detained were subjected to
ill-treatment in detention. There has been little or no
accountability for the deaths, injuries and various other abuses perpetrated by
Sudanese authorities against protesters. Apatchwork of legal
immunities effectively shields government forces from criminal prosecution and
accountability. In Sudan, complaints against a member of the security services
are effectively curtailed by immunities in legislation governing the SAF, NISS
and police for acts committed “in good faith” and “in the course of duty”.
Immunities can only be waived by the relevant governing bodies of the Ministry
of Interior, Defence or Director of the NISS. The ACHPR considered the issue in
a number of cases against Sudan, finding that immunities are incompatible with
the right to an effective remedy under the African Charter and concluding that
Sudan’s legal system does not provide effective remedies for victims of human
rights violations.[4]
We,
the undersigned African and international organisations, condemn the unlawful
killings, arbitrary and continued incommunicado detentions, torture and other
forms of ill-treatment, excessive use of force and post-print censorship by
government forces. We urge you to reiterate to the Government of Sudan that all
Sudanese have the right to freedom of expression, association, and assembly
including freedom of the media. We further urge you to call on the Government
of Sudan to:
·               
Guarantee the safety and well-being
of all detainees and grant them immediate and unfettered access to their
lawyers, family members and medical services.
·               
Charge or release all those
arbitrarily detained, and for those charged, ensure prompt access to a lawyer
of their own choosing and full respect for their rights as detainees and to due
process and a fair trial.
·               
End its policies of post and
pre-print censorship of newspapers.
·               
Stop harassing and intimidating
Sudanese citizens including human rights defenders, peaceful activists and
journalists and others who seek to exercise their rights to freedom of
expression, association, and assembly.
·               
Conduct an immediate, independent
and impartial investigation into all allegations of excessive use of force
against peaceful protestors as well as ill-treatment and torture of detainees
by police and NISS. Findings of such investigations should be made public and
perpetrators should be held accountable before an independent and impartial
tribunal.
Sincerely,
Organisations:
African
Centre for Justice and Peace Studies (ACJPS)
Alkarama
Foundation
Al-Khatim
Adlan Centre for Enlightenment, Sudan (KACE)
Association
for Human Rights in Ethiopia (AHRE)
DefendDefenders
(East and Horn of Africa Human Rights Defenders Project). Face Past for Future
Foundation ( FP4F) Horn of Africa Civil Society Forum
Human
Rights Watch
International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)
International
Refugee Rights Initiative (IRRI)
National
Coalition for Human Rights Defenders- Uganda (NCHRD-U)
Sudan
Consortium
Sudan
Democracy First Group
SUDO
(UK)
The
MagkaSama Project, France
The
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
Waging
Peace 
Individuals:
Eltigani
Hassan Mohamed Idis, Sudanese Advocate 
Bakri
Jebril Mohamed, Sudanese Advocate 
Mohanad
Mustafa Elnour, Sudanese Advocate 
Amani
Osman Hamdi, Sudanese Advocate
  
BACKGROUND
Excessive
use of force to crackdown on January 2018 Protests
The
announcement of Sudan’s 2018 budget and the lifting of subsidies and other
measures effectively tripling Sudan’s US dollar exchange rate and increasing
the price of basic commodities sparked off protests across Sudan. On several
occasions in January, Sudanese authorities have used excessive force to
disperse demonstrators, including beating peaceful demonstrators with sticks
and batons and firing tear gas into crowds. Four journalists are reported to
have sustained severe injuries after being beaten by police during the protests
on 16 and 17 January.[5]
On
7 January, at 10 AM, in Al Madaris
neighborhood of El Geneina, West Darfur, hundreds of students marched towards
the office of the state Governor to protest the increase in prices of basic
commodities. As the students approached the office, they came across a fleet of
armored vehicles of the joint forces of National Intelligence and Security
Services (NISS), Rapid Support Forces (RSF) and Police who fired live
ammunition into the crowd to disperse the students. Seven students sustained
gunshot wounds, one of whom was shot in the chest and died on the spot.[6]
On
16 January, at 12 PM, an estimated one thousand protestors including political
opposition leaders, journalists, students, human rights defenders and activists
participated in a peaceful march in Khartoum to deliver a letter addressed to
the governor of Khartoum state, condemning the drastic increase of prices of
basic commodities as a result of the recent austerity measures. The march,
organized by the Sudanese Communist Party, began at Martyrs Gardens in central
Khartoum and proceeded to the main building of Khartoum state government.
According to witnesses, after 15-20 minutes, police fired tear gas into the
crowd and together with NISS officers began beating protestors to disperse
them. According to eye-witness accounts, Ms. Amel Habani, a journalist with Al Tagheer newspaper and a human rights
defender, was beaten by security officials as they arrested her during the 16
January protest in Khartoum Bahri. Ms. Azza Ibn Aouf and Ms.
Nada Ramadan, were also beaten by police as the protestors were being
dispersed. Authorities arrested approximately 82 individuals, released 52, and
detained 30 individuals at the NISS office in Khartoum Bahri.[7]
On
20 January[8]
and 5 February[9],
NISS released two detainees who were in their custody since 16 January. On 28
January 2018, two other detainees were transferred to NISS political section at
Zalingei prison in Central Darfur, approximately 1,300 kilometres away from
Khartoum and are still being detained incommunicado.[10]
On
17 January, police and security forces arrested and detained 38 more
individuals who were participating in a protest against the increase in prices
of basic commodities, held in Omdurman. Mr. Bahram Abdulmonim was beaten by the
police and sustained injuries to his right hand.[11]
Three detainees were released on 22 January 2018.[12]
On
18 January, national security in Port Sudan, in Red Sea state, raided the
University of Red Sea whilst students were engaged in a protest against the
increase in prices of basic commodities. The security officials, armed with
water hose pipes, beat up the student protestors as they dispersed them. During
the raid, three students were arrested and detained at the NISS office in Port
Sudan.[13]
On
20 January, at least 5 people were killed and 26 others sustained gunshot
wounds when the Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) and Rapid Support Forces (RSF)
opened live ammunition on a crowd of peaceful protestors at Hasahisa camp for
internally displaced persons (IDPs) in Zalingei, Central Darfur.[14]
In Sudan, NISS and armed forces have powers concurrent
to police’s powers during demonstrations as provided for in the National
Security Act of 2010 and the Armed Forces Act of 2007.[15]
The involvement of military and armed security in policing has proven to be
highly problematic in Sudan; all forces should only use force as a last resort
and in proportion to what is strictly necessary to respond to acts of violence.
Prolonged
and incommunicado detention
From
6 January through 6 February 2018, the NISS arrested and detained approximately
94 individuals, including opposition political party leaders, student
activists, journalists, and human rights defenders for an indefinite period and
in most cases incommunicado, without
charge or access to their families or lawyers.[16]
The
NISS routinely holds detainees incommunicado and without charge for prolonged
periods including in excess of the four and a half months permitted by the
National Security Act of 2010.[17]
See Annex 1 for a list of detainees currently under NISS custody.
On
15 January, the Security Committee of Al Obeid, in North Kordofan, headed by
the governor of the state, placed two
human rights defenders, Mr. Osman Salih, an advocate and a member of the
Sudanese Communist Party and Ali Abulgasim, an advocate and a member of the
National Umma Party, under six months detention in accordance with the
emergency law.[18]
Following this
decision, the two human rights defenders were transferred from NISS custody in
Al Obeid where they were being held incommunicado since their arrest on 10
January and taken to the Al Obeid Prison. Two applications requesting that the
families be granted permission to visit the detainees were denied by the
security committee of Al-Obeid on 15 January and 4 February. The detainees have
been held incommunicado for 28 days.
On
25 January and 30 January, two constitutional petitions were submitted by a
team of Sudanese lawyers on behalf of 20 individuals currently in NISS
detention. The petition was filed against the Government of Sudan and the
National Intelligence and Security Services. The petition argues that the
arrest and continued detention of the 20 individuals, among others, violates
their rights to freedom of expression and assembly as guaranteed in the Interim
National Constitution and international treaties ratified by Sudan. The
petition also requests the court to order authorities holding the 9 detainees
to produce them before the court for the hearing of the case to proceed.[19]
Confiscation
of print runs of daily newspapers
In
addition to the crackdown on protests, the NISS have continuously confiscated
daily print runs of Sudanese daily newspapers without giving any reason. The
confiscations started on 7 January after newspapers covered anti-austerity
protests that occurred on 5 and 6 January in Khartoum, Aljazeera, and Kassala.
The authorities have continued to prevent distribution of print runs of
different daily newspapers, including traditionally pro-government newspapers,
across the month of January. According to a reliable source, newspapers suffer
a loss of approximately $450 when their daily print runs are confiscated.
On
the morning of 7 January, NISS officials prevented six daily newspapers in
Khartoum from distributing printed copies with no rationale given. They
include:
§              
Altayyar,
a traditionally pro-government newspaper;
§              
Almustagila,
a traditionally pro-government newspaper;
§              
Algarar,
a traditionally pro-government newspaper;
§              
Alsiha,
a traditionally pro-government newspaper;
§              
Akhbar
Alwatan, affiliated with Sudanese Congress Party and
§              
Al
Midan, affiliated with the Sudanese Communist Party.[20]
On
8 January 2018, the NISS confiscated the daily print-runs of Aljareeda, an independent newspaper and Albaath, a newspaper affiliated with
Arabic Baath Party, without giving reasons. The lead story of Aljareeda newspaper which was
confiscated covered the
student protests that took place in El Geneina, West
Darfur, the previous day.[21]
On
21 January, NISS confiscated daily print runs of Akhbar Alwatan without any reasons given. The trucks carrying the
daily print runs were intercepted by the NISS as they headed out of the
printing house. The edition contained an article about the crackdown of the
protests and the arbitrary arrests carried out in connection with the protests.
Akhbar Alwatan newspaper is
traditionally affiliated to the opposition Sudanese Congress Party. Al Midan newspaper was prevented from
distributing its daily print runs on 16, 17 and 18 January 2018, without any
reasons given. Aljareeda was
prevented from distributing its daily print runs on 16, 18, 19 and 20 January
2018, without any reasons given. It is very likely that the confiscations
relate to their coverage of the peaceful protests against the government. Al Midan newspaper is traditionally
affiliated with the opposition Sudanese Communist Party that organised the
January 16 protest in Khartoum.[22]
On
28 January, the NISS of Khartoum prevented the distribution of daily prints
runs of Al Midan Newspaper,
affiliated with Sudanese Communist party and Akhbar Alwatan affiliated with Sudanese Congress party, without
giving any reason.[23]
On
1 February, the NISS of Khartoum prevented the distribution of daily prints
runs of Al Midan Newspaper, a
newspaper traditionally affiliated with Sudanese Communist party and Aljareeda independent newspaper, without
giving any reasons. According to a reliable source, it is believed that the
post-print censorship of the two newspapers was done in response to articles
discussing the protest that took place in Khartoum Bahri on 31st January 2018.[24]
On
6 February, the NISS of Khartoum prevented Al
Midan newspaper from distributing copies of its daily print runs without
giving any reasons.[25]



[1] ACJPS, Sudanese forces fire live
ammunition at student protesters killing one student and injuring six others in
El Geneina, West Darfur, 8 January 2018, available at: http://www.acjps.org/sudanese-forces-fire-live-ammunition-at-student-protesters-killing-one-student-and-injuring-six-others-in-el-geneina-west-darfur/


[2] ACJPS, Sudanese forces fire live
ammunition at student protesters killing one student and injuring six others in
El Geneina, West Darfur, 8 January 2018, available at: http://www.acjps.org/sudanese-forces-fire-live-ammunition-at-student-protesters-killing-one-student-and-injuring-six-others-in-el-geneina-west-darfur/


[3] Annex 1: information on arrests and
detention January-February 2018


[4] See in particular ACHPR, Abdel Hadi, Ali Radi & Others v Republic
of Sudan, Communication 368/10, 2013, paras. 47-49 and Osman Hummaida, Monim Elgak and Amir Suliman v Sudan, Communication
379/09, 2014, paras. 66-70.


[5] ACJPS,
79 activists detained incommunicado amidst heavy crackdown on popular protests
in Sudan, 22 January 2018, available at: http://www.acjps.org/79-activists-detained-incommunicado-amidst-heavy-crackdown-on-popular-protests-in-sudan/;HRW, AI,
KACE, ACJPS, Sudan: Stop Abuse of Peaceful Demonstrators, 29 January 2018,
available at: http://www.acjps.org/sudan-stop-abuse-of-peaceful-demonstrators/.


[6] Op. cit., ACJPS, Sudanese forces
fire live ammunition at student protesters killing one student and injuring six
others in El Geneina, West Darfur.


[7] Op.
cit., ACJPS, 79 activists detained incommunicado amidst heavy crackdown on
popular protests in Sudan


[8] Rashan Aushie, a journalist with
Aljareeda newspaper was released on 20 January. ACJPS, Update: Continued
arbitrary arrests and incommunicado detention of Sudanese citizens amidst
crackdown on January 2018 peaceful protests, 30 January 2018, available at; http://www.acjps.org/update-continued-arbitrary-arrests-and-incommunicado-detention-of-sudanese-citizens-amidst-crackdown-on-january-2018-peaceful-protests/ .


[9] Mr.
Sidig Yousef Ibrahim Elnour, a member of Central Committee of opposition
Sudanese Communist Party, was arrested on 16 January and released on 5
February. ACJPS, Update: 29 individuals join the list of individuals detained
incommunicado, 7 February 2018, available at; http://www.acjps.org/update-29-individuals-join-the-list-of-individuals-detained-incommunicado/.


[10] Op. cit., ACJPS, Update: Continued
arbitrary arrests and incommunicado detention of Sudanese citizens amidst
crackdown on January 2018 peaceful protests, 30 January 2018.


[11] Op. cit., ACJPS, 79 activists
detained incommunicado amidst heavy crackdown on popular protests in Sudan.


[12] Op. cit., ACJPS, Update: Continued
arbitrary arrests and incommunicado detention of Sudanese citizens amidst
crackdown on January 2018 peaceful protests, 30 January 2018.


[13] Ibid.


[14] Op.
cit., ACJPS, Five IDPs killed as SAF and RSF use live ammunition to disperse a
protest in Central Darfur.


[15] Amnesty
International and ACJPS, Excessive and Deadly: The use of disproportionate
force, arbitrary detention
and torture against protestors in Sudan, 3 September 2014,
available at: http://www.acjps.org/excessive-and-deadly-the-use-of-disproportionate-force-arbitrary-detention-and-torture-against-protestors-in-sudan/ .


[16] Annex
1: information on arrests and detention January-February 2018. See also: ACJPS,
18 individuals arbitrarily detained in the wake of anti-austerity protests
throughout Sudan, 12 January 2018, available at; http://www.acjps.org/18-individuals-arbitrarily-detained-in-the-wake-of-anti-austerity-protests-throughout-sudan/; Op. cit., ACJPS, 79 activists
detained incommunicado amidst heavy crackdown on popular protests in Sudan; Op.
cit., ACJPS, Update: 29 individuals join the list of individuals detained
incommunicado; Op. cit., ACJPS, Update: 29 individuals join the list of
individuals detained incommunicado, FIDH, Sudan : Incommunicado detention of 8
human rights defenders, lawyer and journalists, and arbitrary detention of a
journalist and human rights defender for participating in peaceful protests, 8
February 2018, available at: https://www.fidh.org/en/issues/human-rights-defenders/sudan-incommunicado-detention-of-8-human-rights-defenders-lawyer-and


[17] Under the 2010 National Security Act
(NSA), detainees can be held for up to four and a half months without judicial
review


[18] A
state of emergency is in force in the five states of Darfur, South Kordofan and
Blue Nile, bringing Sudan’s emergency laws into operation. The legal framework
for emergencies as set out in the Emergency and Protection of Public Safety Act
of 1997, read together with the Emergency and Public Safety bylaw of 1998,
permits preventive arrest and detention on vague grounds. These include the
belief of the authorities that the person in question has acted or may act in a
way that “affects public security, or public safety, or … participated in any
crime related to the declaration”. The 1998 bylaw provides neither time limits
for this type of detention, nor judicial oversight, and therefore authorises
prolonged if not indefinite detention. The broad powers given to the Executive
under the 1997 Act and 1998 bylaw have repeatedly given rise to concerns over
arbitrary arrest and detention, ill-treatment and torture, and violations of
the right to a fair trial, which are facilitated by the virtually complete
absence of safeguards and judicial oversight. Op. cit., ACJPS, Update: Continued arbitrary arrests and incommunicado
detention of Sudanese citizens amidst crackdown on January 2018 peaceful
protests, 30 January 2018;; KACE, Constitutional Appeal Filed On Behalf Of Amel
Habbani And Other Detained Human Rights Defenders, 6 February 2018, available
at; http://www.kacesudan.org/en/constitutional-appeal-filed-behalf-amel-habbani-detained-human-rights-defenders/.


[19] Op.
cit., ACJPS, Update: Continued arbitrary arrests and incommunicado detention of
Sudanese citizens amidst crackdown on January 2018 peaceful protests, 30
January 2018;; KACE, Constitutional Appeal Filed On Behalf Of Amel Habbani And
Other Detained Human Rights Defenders, 6 February 2018, available at; http://www.kacesudan.org/en/constitutional-appeal-filed-behalf-amel-habbani-detained-human-rights-defenders/.


[20] ACJPS,
8 newspapers prevented from distribution by NISS amidst protests against recent
austerity measures, 9 January 2018, available at: http://www.acjps.org/8-newspapers-prevented-from-distribution-by-niss-amidst-protests-against-recent-austerity-measures/; CPJ,
Sudanese authorities seize critical papers after reports on rising food prices,
8 January 2018, available at: https://cpj.org/2018/01/sudanese-authorities-seize-critical-papers-after-r.php.


[21] Ibid.


[22] Op. cit., ACJPS, 79 activists
detained incommunicado amidst heavy crackdown on popular protests in Sudan.


[23] Op.
cit., ACJPS, Update: Continued arbitrary arrests and incommunicado detention of
Sudanese citizens amidst crackdown on January 2018 peaceful protests.


[24] Op. cit., ACJPS, UPDATE: 29
individuals join the list of individuals detained incommunicado, CPJ, Sudan
detains local journalist, confiscates newspapers following reporting on
protests, 2 February 2018, available at: https://cpj.org/2018/02/sudan-detains-local-journalist-confiscates-newspap.php


[25] Ibid. 