Iran:  Arbitrary detention of and judicial harassment against Messrs. Khosro Kordpour and Massoud Kordpour, two journalists and brothers from the Kurdish ethnic community
August  9, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2013 / AugustIran: Arbitrary detention of and judicial harassment against Messrs. Khosro Kordpour and Massoud Kordpour, two journalists and brothers from the Kurdish ethnic community

IRN 001 / 0813 / OBS 073
Arbitrary detention /
Judicial harassment
Iran
August 9, 2013
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in the Iran.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been
informed by the Iranian League for the Defence of
Human Rights (LDDHI) about the arbitrary detention of and judicial
harassment against two journalists and brothers from the Kurdish ethnic
community, Messrs. Khosro Kordpour and Massoud Kordpour,
respectively editor and correspondent of the Mukrian News Agency,
reporting mainly about the conditions of civil rights activists, political
prisoners and violations of human rights, in particular in the Iranian
Kurdish-inhabited regions and cities.
 
According to the
information received, on March 7, 2013, Mr. Koshro Kordpour was arrested in the
west-Iranian Kurdish-inhabited city of Mahabad by Intelligence Ministry’s
agents who confiscated his personal belongings.
 
Two days later, on March 9,
Mr. Massoud Kordpour was in turn arrested as he was trying to find out about
the reasons for his brother’s detention.
 
About 10 days later, both
were taken to the detention centre of the Islamic Revolution Guards Corps
(IRGC) in the West-Azerbaijan provincial capital Urumiya, where they were kept
for four months in solitary confinement. 
 
Their family members were
able to separately visit them for the first time on April 25, 2013 for 10
minutes. Messrs. Khosro and Massoud Kordpour told their relatives that they had
not even been interrogated during those 45 days, and demanded to have access to
lawyers. The second visit took place on May 27, 2013.
 
Mr. Khosro Kordpour
subsequently went on a hunger strike for 25 days to protest his conditions
while in IRGC detention centre in Urumiya. 
 
Both were transferred to
Mahabad prison on June 26, 2013, where it was revealed that Mr. Khosro Kordpour
had lost 12 kilos and Mr. Massoud Kordpour 20 kilos. It was only after being
transferred to Mahabad that they were charged.
 
Mr. Khosro Kordpour was
charged with “moharebeh” (“fighting God”), “corruption on earth through
assembly and collusion to commit crimes against the national security”,
“insulting the Leader”, “propaganda activities against the State” and
“spreading lies with intent to disturb the public minds”, while Mr. Massoud
Kordpour was charged with “assembly and collusion to commit crimes against the
national security”, “insulting the Leader”, “propaganda activities against the
State” and “spreading lies with intent to disturb the public minds”.
 
On August 5, 2013, Branch 1
of the Islamic Revolution Court of Mahabad held the first session of their
trial, during which the judge read out their charges. The lawyers of the two
defendants objected to the competence of the court on the ground that the
defendants were journalists and that they should be tried at a Press Court in the
presence of a jury as their charges were related to press activities. They also
objected to the absence of the prosecutor’s representative at the hearing. 
 
The judge rejected the
objection about his competence, but accepted the second objection. 
 
Mr. Khosro Kordpour
defended himself at the court stating that he was there only for being a
journalist, and that all the articles of the news agency had been published
within the frameworks of the law. Mr. Massoud Kordpour also defended himself
stating he had only fulfilled his duty of reporting issues, as stipulated in
the Constitution.
 
Their lawyers requested the
judge to release them on bail, but the judge did not issue any decision in
court, saying he would notify them of his decision at a later stage. 
 
The second hearing is due
to take place in late August or in September.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please
write to the Iranian authorities and ask them to:
 
i. Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Messrs. Khosro
Kordpour and Massoud Kordpour, as well as of
all human rights defenders in Iran;
 
ii. Release Messrs. Khosro Kordpour and
Massoud Kordpour immediately and unconditionally as their detention is arbitrary since it only aims at sanctioning their human rights
activities;
 
iii. Put
an end to any kind of harassment - including at the judicial level - against
Messrs. Khosro Kordpour and Massoud Kordpour and all human rights defenders in
Iran, and release them all;
 
iv. Conform
in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly,
in particular its article 1, which states that “everyone has the right,
individually or in association with others, to promote the protection and
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”, and its article 12.2 which provides that “the State
shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent
authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against
any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination,
pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her
legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 
v. Ensure
in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Iran.
 
Addresses:

· Leader of the
Islamic Republic, His Excellency Ayatollah Sayed Ali Khamenei, The Office of
the Supreme Leader, Shahid Keshvardoost St., Jomhuri Eslami Ave., Tehran,
Islamic Republic of Iran. Tel: +98 21 64411; Faxes: + 98 21 649 5880 / 21 774
2228, Email: info_leader@leader.ir
· President
Mr. Hassan Rohani, the Presidency, Palestine Avenue, Palestine Roundabout, Tehran,
Islamic Republic of Iran. Tel: +98 21 64451; Fax: + 98 21 649 5880. 
· Head of the Judiciary, His Excellency Ayatollah
Sadeq Larijani, Office of the Head of the Judiciary, Pasteur Street, Vali Asr
Avenue, south of Serah-e Jomhuri, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Fax: +98 21
879 6671 / +98 21 3 311 6567, Email: info@dadiran.ir / info@dadgostary-tehran.ir / info@bia-judiciary.ir
· Minister of
Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Sheikh Abdolmajid Kushk-e Mesri
Av, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Fax: +98-21-66743149; Email: matbuat@mfa.gov.ir
· H.E.
Mr. Mohsen Naziri Asl,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Chemin du Petit-Saconnex
28, 1209 Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 7330203, Email: mission.iran@ties.itu.int
· His Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Barimani, Embassy of the Islamic Republic Iran in Belgium, 15
avenue Franklin Roosevelt, 1050 Bruxelles, Belgium. Fax: + 32 2 762
39 15. Email: secreteriat@iranembassy.be; iranemb.bru@mfa.gov.ir 

Please also write to
diplomatic representations of Iran in your respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva,
August 9, 2013
 
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
To contact the Observatory,
call the emergency line: 
Email: Appeals@fidh-omct.org Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1
     43 55 18 80 Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / +
     41 22 809 49 29 