Egypt:  Arbitrary arrest of Ms. El-Massry, Mr. Shaban and judicial harassment of Mr. Rahman
May 22, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2015 / MayEgypt: Arbitrary arrest of Ms. El-Massry, Mr. Shaban and judicial harassment of Mr. RahmanNew informationEGY 001 / 0514 / OBS 
045.6Judicial harassment / Arbitrary 
arrestEgyptMay 22, 2015
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human 
Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human 
Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received 
new information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation 
in Egypt.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable 
sources about the ongoing judicial harassment and arbitrary arrest of Ms. 
Mahienour El-Massry, a human rights lawyer known for her 
activism in favour of judicial independence and prisoners' rights by organising 
peaceful protests, support activities for political prisoners and using social 
media to denounce human rights violations, and Mr. Youssef 
Shaban, a journalist and defender of workers' rights. Furthermore, the 
Observatory was informed about the ongoing judicial harassment of Mr. 
Loay Mohamed Abdel Rahman, an independent youth activist who is 
already currently arbitrarily detained for another case (see background 
information).
 
According to the information received, on May 
11, 2015, El Raml Misdemeanour Court of Appeal in Alexandria heard the appeal of 
Ms. Mahienour El-Massry, Mr. Youssef Shaban and Mr. Loay Mohamed Abdel Rahman, 
along with seven other activists. In that occasion, the court ordered the remand 
in custody of Ms. Mahienour El-Massry and Youssef Shaban. They will remain in 
detention pending the outcome of the appeal scheduled for May 31.
 
The defendants were accused of storming El Raml 
police station in Alexandria and assaulting police officers as well as torching 
the Freedom and justice party headquarters, political arm of the Muslim 
Brotherhood in March 2013, “protesting without authorization”, “disrupting 
traffic”, “damaging content of the Police Station”, “attacking security forces”, 
“spreading fear and terror among citizens” and “attempt to smuggle 
prisoners”.
 
The Observatory condemns the arbitrary 
detention of Ms. Mahienour El-Massry, Mr. Youssef Shaban and Mr. Loay Mohamed 
Abdel Rahman and calls upon the Egyptian authorities to immediately release them 
and drop all charges against them as they are clearly aimed at hindering their 
peaceful human rights activities.
 
Background information:
 
On January 2, 2014, Alexandria Manshiya 
Misdemeanour Court sentenced in absentia Ms. Mahienour El-Massry and seven 
members of the political group “Revolutionary Socialists” , including human 
rights lawyer Mr. Hassan Mustafa  and independent youth activist Mr. Loay 
Mohamed Abdel Rahman to two years’ imprisonment and a fine of EGP 50,000 for 
“protesting without a permit” and “assaulting security forces” following their 
participation in a peaceful protest on December 2, 2013 to denounce police 
violence and in particular the impunity of Khaled Saeed murder. Khaled Saeed was 
killed by police forces on June 6, 2010 and subsequently became a symbol of 
police repression during the 2011 Egyptian Revolution. Ms. Mahienour El-Massry 
had failed to appear as she had not been informed in advance of the date of the 
hearing.
 
On May 20, 2014, the Sidi Gaber Misdemeanour 
Court in Alexandria rejected the demurrer filed by Ms. Mahienour El-Massry 
regarding the sentence issued against her in absentia. Ms. Mahienour El-Massry 
was immediately detained following the hearing.
 
On May 22, 2014, the Egyptian security forces 
violently repressed participants to a solidarity march organised outside of the 
headquarters of Egyptian Center for Economic & Social Rights (ECESR) in 
Alexandria, following a press conference organised to express support with Ms. 
Mahienour El-Massry. Several female protesters were sexually harassed by 
security forces. Some protesters were beaten and arrested by the police. After 
the march, security forces stormed into ECESR’s headquarters, smashed some of 
its equipment and arrested several employees.
 
On July 20, 2014, after successive 
adjournments, the Sidi Gaber Appeal Misdemeanour Court in Alexandria sentenced 
Ms. Mahienour El-Massry to six months of prison and a fine of EGP 50,000 
(approximately EUR 5,143) for “protesting without a permit” and “assaulting 
security forces”. Ms. Mahienour El-Massry's lawyers appealed the sentence before 
the Court of Cassation.
 
On September 21, the demurrer was accepted and 
Al Mansheya Misdemeanour Appeals Court decided to suspend the execution of Ms. 
Mahienour El-Massry's six-month prison sentence, pending the appeal lodged 
before the Court of Cassation. This decision followed a request filed by Ms. 
Mahienour El-Massry's lawyers challenging the execution of her sentence pending 
a final outcome.
 
Moreover, Ms. El-Massry is also facing trial on 
separate charges for an incident that occurred in March 2013. On May 8, 2014, 
Ms. El-Massry was referred to court on charges of “assaulting security forces” 
after, in March 2013, she, other lawyers and human rights activists went to Raml 
police station to provide legal assistance to three lawyers who were arrested 
and sent to the police by supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood (the “Raml police 
station” case). The lawyers were attacked by the police in the police station, 
and Ms. El-Massry was detained briefly before the Prosecution decided to release 
her and the others. The trial was then postponed several times following the 
resignation of the appointed judge from the bench. The case was heard on July 
21, 2014 and then postponed to October 13 and November 17, 2014.
 
On November 17, 2014, the Raml Misdemeanour 
Court held a hearing in the “Raml police station” criminal case. The court heard 
three testimonies provided by witnesses presented by the defence. The defence 
additionally requested the court to summon the persons who filed the complaint 
against Ms. Mahienour El-Massry, and to include the administrative police case 
report. The Court then adjourned the hearing until December 8.
 
On February 9, 2015, El Raml Misdemeanour Court 
in Alexandria sentenced Ms. Mahienour El-Massry, together with Messrs. Youssef 
Shabaan and Loay Mohamed Abdel Rahman and seven activists to two years in jail. 
Ms. Mahienour El-Massry was not detained after the issuance of the verdict, as 
she paid bail (approximately EUR 580) pending appeal. Ms. Mahienour El-Massry 
filed a demurrer to challenge the abovementioned sentence.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Egypt asking 
them to:
 
i. Immediately and unconditionally release Ms. 
Mahienour El-Massry, Mr. Youssef Shaban and Mr. Loay Mohamed Abdel Rahman 
;
 
ii. Drop all charges against Ms. Mahienour 
El-Massry, Mr. Youssef Shaban and Mr. Loay Mohamed Abdel Rahman, as they are 
clearly aimed at hindering her peaceful human rights activities and put an end 
to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level against them, and 
more generally all human rights defenders in Egypt;
 
iii. Guarantee in all circumstances the 
physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Mahienour El-Massry and all human 
rights defenders in Egypt, Mr. Youssef Shaban and Mr. Loay Mohamed Abdel 
Rahman;
 
iv. Comply with all the provisions of the 
United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted on December 9, 1998 
by the United Nations General Assembly, in particular with:- its Article 1, 
which provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in association 
with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of 
Human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international 
levels”;- its Article 5(a): “For the purpose of promoting and protecting 
Human rights and fundamental freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and 
in association with others, at the national and international levels (a) To meet 
or assemble peacefully”- its Article 6(a), which foresees that “everyone has 
the right, individually and in association with others, to participate in 
peaceful activities against violations of Human rights and fundamental 
freedoms”;- its Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all 
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of 
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, 
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or 
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of 
the rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 
v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for 
human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human 
rights standards and international instruments ratified by Egypt.
 
Addresses :
 
• President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, H.E. 
Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 23901998• 
Prime Minister, Mr. Ibrahim Mehleb, Magles El Shaab Street, Kasr El Aini Street, 
Cairo, Egypt. Fax: + 202 2735 6449 / 27958016. Email: primemin@idsc.gov.eg• 
Minister of the Interior, General Magdy Abdel Ghaffar, Ministry of the Interior, 
El-Sheikh Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: moi1@idsc.gov.eg, 
Fax: +202 2579 2031 / 2794 5529• Minister of Justice, Mr. Ezzat Khamis, 
Ministry of Justice, Magles El Saeb Street, Wezaret Al Adl, Cairo, Egypt, 
E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2795 8103• Public Prosecutor, 
Counsellor Hisham Barakat Dar al-Qadha al-Ali, Ramses Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: 
+202 2577 4716• Mr. Mohamed Fayeq, President of the National Council For 
Human Rights, Fax: + 202 25747497 / 25747670. Email: nchr@nchr.org.eg• H.E. 
Ms. Wafaa Bassim, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations 
in Geneva, 49 avenue Blanc, 1202 Genève, Switzerland, Email: 
mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41 22 738 44 15• Embassy of Egypt in 
Brussels, 19 avenue de l’Uruguay, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 675.58.88; 
Email: egyptembassy@embassyofegypt.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or 
embassies of Egypt in your respective country. 