Bulgaria:  Bulgaria: Mr. Traianova, Roma person tortured by police
September 10, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Bulgaria / 2002 / SeptemberBulgaria: Bulgaria: Mr. Traianova, Roma person tortured by policeCase BGR 100902 Torture  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Bulgaria.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received information from the Greek Helsinki Monitor, that 28-year old Mr. Stefan Liydov Traianov of Roma origins, was subjected to torture on August 21st 2002, in Kjustendil, Bulgaria.  According to the information received, at 10a.m. on August 21st 2002, Mr. Traianov was summoned to the police station to assist in a police theft inquiry. Upon arrival, the police informed Mr. Traianov that they had witnesses and evidence that proved Mr. Traianov was guilty of the crime.  According to the source, Mr. Traianov affirmed his innocence. Shortly thereafter, three policemen entered the room, handcuffed Mr. Traianov and lead him out of the police station through a backdoor. They forced Mr. Traianov into a car and drove to a forest where Mr. Traianov was subjected to torture. According to the information received, the three policemen beat Mr. Traianov with wooden sticks causing him to lose consciousness twice. The policemen then proceeded to hang Mr. Traianov from a tree and tied his legs together. The policemen then pulled his legs and started kicking him, asking him to confess.  Mr. Traianov reportedly continued to deny the charges, and the police finally stopped torturing him and removed the handcuffs.  Mr. Traianov was told to get back into the car. On the way back to town one of the policemen reportedly threatened Mr. Traianov saying that if Mr. Traianov told anyone of the incident the police would make sure he would “disappear”. The policemen left Mr. Traianov bleeding on a dirt road near the town. After about one hour, two of Mr. Traianov neighbours’ passed by with a cart and helped him home.  That afternoon a policeman returned Mr. Trainov’s identity card which had been confiscated that morning. The policeman told him that he knew nothing about the beatings.  Soon after, Mr. Traianov went to the doctor for a medical examination and was issued a certificate that stated that Mr. Traianov showed signs of physical torture, including abrasions and swollen areas filled with blood all over his body as well as a bruised and swollen left ankle.  According to the source, the Greek Helsinki Monitor Human Rights Project has reported the incident to the Ministry of Interior and to the Office of the Sofia Regional Military Prosecutor, including data about the crime committed by the three policemen. The names of the policemen are known.  The victim has also lodged a complaint about this incident.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is concerned for Mr. Traianov’s physical and psychological integrity. Furthermore, OMCT is gravely concerned about the continuing numbers of attacks against Roma people in Bulgaria, as they seem to be frequently the target of violent acts of discrimination. OMCT condemns the police’s use of torture, which is in violation of the international human rights norms subscribed by Bulgaria. OMCT is concerned that the perpetrators of this attack will not be brought to justice, that they will continue to be active within the police force, and that Mr. Traianov may not receive adequate reparation for the injuries sustained during these events.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Bulgaria urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Stefan Liydov Traianov; ii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iii.	guarantee adequate reparation to Mr. Stefan Liydov Traianov; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights laws and standards.  Addresses   ·	Simeon Saxe-Coburg Gotha, Prime Minister of the Republic of Bulgaria, 1, Dondukov Blvd, 1123, Sofia, Bulgaria, Fax: (+359)-2-981 8170, E-mail: primeminister@government.bg   ·	Anton Stankov, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, 1, Slavyanska Str. 1040 Sofia, Bulgaria, Fax: (+359)-2-987 4058, E-mail: pr@mjeli.government.bg   ·	Georgi Parvanov, President of the Republic of Bulgaria, 2, Dondukov Blvd., 1123 Sofia, Fax:(+359)-2-987 5601, E-mail: press@president.bg   Please also write to the embassies of Bulgaria in your respective country.  Geneva, September 10th, 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 