Iran:  Arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh
June 15, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2018 / JuneIran: Arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh​New informationIRN 001 / 0618 / OBS 085
Arbitrary detention /
Judicial harassment
Iran
June 15, 2018
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, has received new information and requests your
urgent intervention in the following situation in Iran. 
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been
informed by the League for the Defence of Human Rights in Iran (LDDHI) about
the arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh, a prominent human rights lawyer and 2012 laureate
of the European Parliament’s Sakharov Prize.
 
According to the information
received, on June 13, 2018, security forces arrested Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh at her
home in Tehran and transferred her to the capital’s Evin prison. Upon her
arrest, she was presented with an arrest warrant and was told that she was
being taken to serve a five-year prison sentence, which had been handed down
against her in absentia. Ms. Nasrin
Sotoudeh was not shown the court’s ruling related to the sentence and had not
been informed of the conviction or the sentence prior to her arrest. The
Iranian judiciary has not disclosed neither the procedure by which the sentence
was issued and communicated nor the possibility given to Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh to
appeal. This is in flagrant contravention of domestic and international fair
trial standards.
 
In August 2015, Ms. Nasrin
Sotoudeh was summoned for interrogation following the renewal of her lawyer’s
licence a while after a nine-month sit-in she had been holding in protest against
a three-year suspension of the licence. The summons did not specify any
charges. However, she was unable to attend the interrogation due to a surgery on
her foot at the time. Her husband went to the court in her place and presented
medical documents regarding her condition and her inability to respond to the
summons.
 
She was then given three weeks
to go to the Islamic Revolution Court. However, when she did go she was not
allowed in, as a number of lawyers are barred from entering the court’s
building. Ms. Sotoudeh was also summoned to the Islamic Revolution Court on
September 4, 2016, with which she complied. However, she was neither tried nor
notified of any charges.
 
The Observatory recalls that
Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh had already been imprisoned for her peaceful and legitimate
human rights activities in September 2010. Following national and international
outcry over her detention, she was released in 2013 after serving more than
three years of her six-year prison sentence[1].
She has spoken out about different human rights issues ever since.
 
The Observatory expresses its
deepest concern about Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh’s arbitrary detention, which appears
aimed at punishing her for her legitimate human rights activities.
 
The Observatory urges the
Iranian authorities to immediately and unconditionally release Ms. Nasrin
Sotoudeh and to guarantee her physical and psychological integrity. The
Observatory further urges the Iranian authorities to ensure that all judicial
proceedings against her are carried out in full compliance with her right to a
fair trial.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the
authorities of Iran asking them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh,
as well as of all human rights defenders in Iran;
 
ii. Immediately and
unconditionally release Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh, as well as all human rights
defenders detained in Iran, as their detention is arbitrary as it is merely
aimed at punishing them for their human rights activities;
 
iii. Put an end to all acts of
harassment, including at the judicial level, against Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh, as
well as of all human rights defenders in Iran and ensure that they are able to carry out
their activities without hindrance;
 
iv. Ensure that all judicial
proceedings against Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh are carried out in full compliance with
her right to a fair trial, as protected under international law;
 
v. Conform in any circumstances
with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on
December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly, in particular its
Articles 1 and 12.2.;
 
vi. Ensure in all
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with international human rights instruments ratified by Iran.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
Leader of the Islamic Republic, H.E. Ayatollah
Sayed Ali Khamenei, Fax: + 98 21 441 2030, Email: info_leader@leader.ir;
Twitter: @khamenei_ir
·    
President Hassan Rouhani, Islamic Republic of
Iran, Fax: + 98 21 644 54811; Email: media@rouhani.ir; Twitter: @HassanRouhani
(English) and @Rouhani_ir (Persian).
·    
Head of the Judiciary, H.E. Ayatollah Sadeq
Larijani, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: +98 21 879 6671 / +98 21 3 311 6567,
Email: info@dadiran.ir / info@dadgostary-tehran.ir / info@bia-judiciary.ir
·    
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mohammad Javad
Zarif, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: +98-21-66743149; matbuat@mfa.gov.ir
·    
Secretary General, High Council for Human
Rights, Mr. Mohammed Javad Larijani, Islamic Republic of Iran. Email:
info@humanrights-iran.ir
·    
H.E. Mr. Javad Amin-Mansour, Ambassador,
Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the United Nations in
Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7330203, Email: mission.iran@ties.itu.int
·    
H.E. Mr. Peiman Seadat, Ambassador, Embassy of
Iran in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 762 39 15. Email:
secreteriat@iranembassy.be
 
Please also write to
diplomatic representations of Iran in your respective countries.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, June 15, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action
undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the
Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and the FIDH. The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent
or remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and
FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights
Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.




[1] On May 6,
2011, the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD) issued an Opinion
declaring Ms. Sotoudeh’s trial and detention arbitrary and illegal. 