Intervention to the 61st session of the African Commission on Human and Poeples' Rights
November  8, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2017 / NovemberIntervention to the 61st session of the African Commission on Human and Poeples' Rights61 ACHPR_HRD Written Intervention_ENG11 pages / 344 KB

WRITTEN INTERVENTION -
THE OBSERVATORY
AFRICAN COMMISSION ON HUMAN AND
PEOPLES' RIGHTS 
 
61st Ordinary Session
 
Banjul, The Gambia
 
November 1 - 15, 2017
 
Contribution of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) 
and FIDH (the International Federation for
Human Rights) 
 
In the framework of their
partnership, 
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders 
 
Madam Chairperson, Distinguished
Commissioners and State Delegates,
 
The World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and FIDH, in the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, thank the African Commission on
Human and Peoples’ Rights (ACHPR) for this opportunity to raise some of the key
issues with respect to the situation of human rights defenders in Africa.
 
While States have the duty to protect human rights
defenders and to ensure that they operate in a safe and enabling environment,
attacks, threats, judicial harassment, criminalisation, legislative and
administrative restrictions, as well as smear campaigns against them continue
to perpetuate an environment of hostility towards their activities.
 
1. Pursuit of criminalisation
threats and violence to silence human rights defenders 
 
In several
countries, we are concerned that human rights defenders are criminalised in retaliation
of their peaceful and legitimate human rights activities recognised and
protected under regional and international human rights instruments.
Furthermore, their human rights are often violated while they are arbitrarily
detained or subjected to arbitrary legal proceedings. 
 
In Cameroon, the endless judicial
harassment since 2013 of Mr. Célestin
Yandal, President of the Collectif
des jeunes de Touboro, a youth human rights organisation in the Adamaoua
region of Cameroon, continues as he being prosecuted in two different cases
under trumped up charges, for denouncing human rights violations committed by
Rey-Bouba’s traditional leader (Lamido) against Touboro’s youths. Hearings in
his case are continuously postponed since the opening of the trial. The
Observatory denounces a flagrant violation of his right to a fair trial which
includes the right to be tried within a reasonable delay.
 
Recently,
Egyptian
authorities have targeted human rights organisations and individuals providing legal
support to Giulio Regeni’s family members in the investigation of Italian
graduate who was abducted and tortured to death in Egypt in 2016. The Egyptian
Commission for Rights and Freedoms (ECRF) is amongst them. Likewise, Mr.
Ibrahim Metwally Hegazy, human
rights lawyer, Co-founder and Coordinator of the Association of the Families of
the Disappeared in Egypt, who has provided legal support to Giulio Regeni’s
family, was forcibly disappeared on September 10, 2017, at Cairo International
Airport before boarding a flight to Geneva, where he was travelling in response
to an invitation by the United Nations (UN) Working Group on Enforced and
Involuntary Disappearances to attend the proceedings of its 113th Session at
the UN Human Rights Council. The whereabouts of Mr. Metwally Hegazy remained
unknown from that date until September 12, when he was reported to be located
in State Security Prosecution custody, in Al-Tagammo’ al-Khamis on the
outskirts of Cairo, where he had been interrogated by the State Security
Prosecution (SSP). During his interrogation, he reported being tortured and his
home was searched by security forces. On September 20, 2017, Egypt’s High State
Security Prosecution renewed the preventive detention of Mr. Ibrahim Metwally
Hegazy for 15 days pending investigation. Mr. Ibrahim Metwally Hegazy is being
suspected of “founding and leading an organisation that was created illegally”
(i.e. the Association of Families of the Disappeared), “spreading false news”
and “communicating with foreign entities in order to undermine national
security”. He is currently detained at the ‘Scorpion’ (Al-Aqrab) high security
wing of Tora prison complex, in solitary confinement, in a cell with refuse and
no electricity. He is being denied access to his lawyers and family.
 
Human rights lawyer at Egyptian Center for Economic
and Social Rights (ECESR), Mr. Tarek
Hussein (aka Tito), was
arbitrarily arrested on June 17, 2017, under accusations of “joining an illegal
organisation” and “calling for a protest”. Mr. Tarek Hussein was held
incommunicado until July 27, 2017, preventing his family and lawyers to visit
him. Following his enforced disappearance while in detention, Mr. Tarek
Hussein’s family and lawyers filed three successive complaints regarding the
various violations suffered by Mr. Tarek Hussein. In an attempt to justify
his detention, authorities claimed that at least 13 verdicts had been issued
all over the country against an individual named "Tarek Hussein", and
in one of the cases, police claimed he was sentenced for “stealing electricity
in 1993”, his birth year. During the nearly 40 days of his illegal detention,
his lawyers submitted documentation and evidence to the authorities to prove
that he was not the "Tarek Hussein" in question. One such case is still
pending and will be heard on November 9, 2017. In addition, Mr. Tarek Hussein
is being investigated under charges of “inciting protest” by the general
prosecution. Mr. Tarek Hussein’s arrest and arbitrary detention occurred amidst
protest over Tiran and Sanafir islands’ transfer to Saudi Arabia, which he had
been vocally opposing.
 
Furthermore, on June 14, 2017, Ms. Esraa Fehead, Founder and Executive
Director of Horeya for Human Rights Organisation in Port Said and member of the
Regional Coalition for Women Human Rights Defenders in the Middle East and
North Africa, was arrested in front of the Governorate Administration Building
in Port Said, at the same time as Mr. Mahmoud
Naguib, former member of the April 6 Youth Movement. Their arrests coincide
with the June 14, 2017, peaceful protests opposing the transfer of Tiran and
Sanafir Islands to Saudi Arabia, that have resulted in the arrest of 60
activists throughout the country. Many of those arrested were forcibly removed
from the street or their homes, while security forces used excessive force to
disperse demonstrators. Mr. Mahmoud Naguib and Ms. Esraa Fehead were both held
in detention and Ms. Fehead was interrogated by the Port Said Prosecution from
June 15 to June 18, 2017. She was subsequently charged with numerous offenses
including: “inciting demonstrations”, “disrupting public and general security”,
“disrupting production and citizens’ welfare”, “affecting public governmental
facilities”, “blocking roads and transportation”, “disrupting traffic”,
“attacking people and private and public possessions, and subjecting them to
danger”. On June 18, 2017, Ms. Fehead and Mr. Naguib were released on a
bail of EGP 10000 (approx. 495 EUR). 
 
In Morocco, the
Observatory reiterates its concerns about the ongoing judicial harassment under
charges of “threat to State security” of Messrs. Maâti Monjib, historian, journalist and President of the
association “Freedom Now” for freedom of expression in Morocco, Hisham Almiraat, President of the Association des droits numériques (ADN),
Hicham Mansouri, Project Officer at the Association marocaine pour le journalisme d’investigation (AMJI), Mohamed
Essabr, President of the Association
marocaine d’éducation de la jeunesse (AMEJ), Abdessamad Ait Aicha,
former training project Coordinator of the Centre
Ibn Rochd, journalist and member of the AMJI. Furthermore, Mr. Rachid
Tarik and Ms. Maria Moukrim, respectively President and former
President of the AMJI are accused of receiving foreign funding without
notifying the authorities. On October 11, 2017, the court decided to
postpone their hearing for the eight time, rescheduling it on December 27,
2017.
 
On May 20, 2017, authorities in Niger arrested Mr. Ali Idrissa from his house outside of
Niamey. As the national coordinator of the Réseau
des Organisations pour la Transparence et l’Analyse Budgétaire (ROTAB) and
of Publiez ce que vous payez-Niger (PCQVP),
Mr. Ali Idrissa has been documenting transparency issues within the country’s
uranium industry. He was arrested following the ban of a protest planned on May
20, calling for the respect of human rights and individual freedoms in Niger as
well as denouncing President Issouou Mahamadou’s poor governance record. Mr.
Ali Idrissa was arrested on allegations that he gave interviews to media after
the protest ban. He was released later this day and further interrogated on May
22, 2017. On that day, he was notified that an investigation for “inciting
rebellion” against him was still pending.
 
In Uganda, on June 23, 2017, Mr. Erasmus Irumba, Coordinator of the
Twerwaneho Listeners Club (TLC), was set to meet with Uganda People’s Defence
Forces (UPDF) senior officials in the province of Ntoroko, at Butungama trading
center. Although Mr. Irumba was summoned to “discuss matters of public importance”
he was told not to be suspicious as he had no criminal record and since no
criminal charges were pending against him. During the meeting, Mr. Erasmus
Irumba and another member of the community, Mr. Siet Kanyoro who was
accompanying him, were both shot in the leg. Whilst still alive, they were both
put in the boot of a private car, driven to a rural area and shot dead at a
close range. Both lifeless bodies were taken to Buhinga Regional Referral
Hospital in Fort Portal, on the wee hours of June 24, 2017. The Observatory
condemns in the strongest terms the murder of Mr. Irumba and urges
authorities in Uganda to adopt effective measures to ensure the protection of
human rights defenders in the country.
 
In addition, since 2016, the Observatory has documented
a pattern of harassment against TLC members who have been threatened, assaulted
and judicially harassed by Ferdsult Engineering Services Limited, a
Uganda-based engineering, procurement and construction (EPC) company accused of
land grabbing in the Rwenzori region of Uganda. On September 12, 2017, TLC
member, Mr. James Rukanpana was shot
in both legs by armed guards hired by Ferdsult Engineering Services Limited in
Kasenda, Western Uganda. Mr. James Rukanpana had been advocating for the rights
of local communities, and opposing the takeover of over 20 crater lakes by
Ferdsult Engineering Services Limited. He has actively participated in radio
talk shows and mobilized communities on the issue. TLC and local communities
filed a civil court case against the company to secure the rights of local
communities to access crater lakes for water and domestic fishing. On June 7,
2017, the court found that the exclusive use of crater lakes by Ferdsult
Engineering Services Limited following the lease by Kabarole District was an
abuse of the rights of local communities, and ruled in favour of local
communities. Mr. James Rukanpana had been intrsumental in the success of the
court case. 
 
Parallel to the civil case filed by TLC against
Ferdsult Engineering Services Limited and Kabarole District Local Government, a
criminal case filed by Ferdsult Engineering Services Limited has been targeting
Messrs. Suleiman Trader, Jackson Magezi, Fred Kyaligonza and Prosper
Businge, four TLC members who had challenged the legality of Ferdsult
Engineering Services Ltd’s acquisition of 20 crater lakes and eviction of
communities in Kabarole District. After being briefly detained on April 28,
2017, Messrs. Suleiman Trader and Jackson Magezi were released on April 29,
2017, on court bail pending trial. On May 3, 2017, the four human rights
defenders have been charged under criminal offenses related to the use of
explosives, electronic gadgets and the poisoning of fish under Chapter 197 of
the 1970 Fish Act following allegations by Ferdsult Engineering Services
Limited. The case is pending before Fort Portal Magistrates Court and if
convicted they would face up to seven years in jail.
 
In Tanzania, the Observatory is
extremely concerned by the wider campaign targeting human
rights defenders working on HIV/AIDS on allegations of “promoting
homosexuality”. On September 17, 2017, 20 people were arrested in hotel in the
Stone Town area of Zanzibar City (Unguja island) as they were attending a
training about HIV/AIDS education programmes.
 
On October 17, 2017, Tanzanian police raided
a legal consultation convened by Strategic Litigation in Africa (ISLA) and Community Health Services
and Advocacy (CHESA) at Dar es
Salaam’s Peacock Hotel. Thirteen people, including ISLA Executive Director Ms. Sibongile Ndashe and CHESA Director Mr.
John Kashiha were detained and
subsequently granted bail on the same day without being charged. However, on
October 20, 2017, the bail was revoked without any reason provided by the
authorities. This followed a statement by the Police Regional Commissioner Mr.
Lazaro Mambosasa, on October 18, 2017, referring to the “arrests of twelve
people who were promoting homosexuality”. All twelve human rights defenders were arrested, taken into
custody to Dar es Salaam Central Police Station and released on bail on October
26, 2017. However, their passports were confiscated upon release.
 
In addition,
on June 3, 2017, Tanzania Students Networking Programme (TSNP), known for
advocating and supporting the role of human rights defenders in public life and
civil society at large, was denied access to the Blue Pearl Hotel, in Dar es
Salaam, where they were about to organise the launch of the book Sauti ya
Watetezi wa Haki Vyuoni (The Voice of Human Rights Defenders in
Universities), which illustrates the harassment tactics used to remove human
rights defenders from positions in higher education institutions in Tanzania,
authored by Mr. Alphonce Lusako, TSNP Secretary General. The Hotel informed
TNSP that they could not enter without a permission letter from the police.
Three police vehicles then arrived at the hotel while event organisers were
negotiating with hotel management out-front and arrested Mr. John Baraka, TSNP Coordinator. When Mr.
Ole Ngurumwa Onesmo, National
Coordinator of the Tanzania Human Rights Defenders Coalition (THRDC), objected
his arrest, he was then immediately arrested too. Both were transported to
Magomeni Police Station without being notified of any charges pending against
them. When THRDC lawyer Mr. Jones
Sendodo asked the police about the nature of the charges, they were unable
to confirm any charges and informed him they were awaiting orders from superior
authorities. On the same day, Messrs. Onesmo and Baraka were later charged with
criminal trespass, after Blue Pearl Hotel filed a complaint stating the men had
forced the hotel to host the launch event for their colleague Mr. Alphonce
Lusako. Messrs. Onesmo and Baraka were released on bail that same day, with
instructions to report to the police on June 5, 2017. Reporting to the station
on June 5, the men were informed that the Blue Pearl Hotel had not yet filed the
documentation required to formalize its complaint. They were ordered to return
on June 7, 2017. Besides, when contacted by Mr. Onesmo on June 6, the Blue
Pearl Hotel had claimed to be unaware of any criminal complaint against Messrs.
Baraka, and Onesmo, on June 7, Blue Pearl representatives confirmed that they
had filed a complaint at the direction of an “unknown authority”. The incident
described above is not the first attempt to hinder the book launch event, that was
initially planned to be held at the Commission of Science Technology (COSTECH),
an institution affiliated with the government of Tanzania, which, in violation
of a contractual agreement, cancelled, forcing the organisers to move the event
to Blue Pearl Hotel, where THRDC had already organised several events without
any issue.
 
2. Constant reprisals against human
rights defenders and civil society organisations promoting democracy and
electoral rights, particularly within electoral contexts 
 
The
Observatory has documented a concerning number of cases of harassment and
criminalisation targeting human rights defenders and civil society
organisations promoting democracy or electoral rights, including within
electoral contexts.
 
In Burundi, since April 2015, following President
Pierre Nkurunziza’s third term bid, human rights defenders continue to face
increased intimidation, harassment, physical attacks and in the most worrying
cases, enforced disappearance. Many have had to flee the country and continue
to face intimidation in their country of relocation.
 
Mr. Germain
Rukiki, Association des juristes
catholiques du Burundi (AJCB) staff member, President of « Njabutsa
Tujane », a community-based organisation fighting against poverty and
hunger, and former Action des chrétiens
pour l’abolition de la torture (ACAT-Burundi) staff member, has been
arbitrarily detained since July 13, 2017. The Observatory has documented
several infringements to his right to a fair trial since his arrest. Initially
detained within the National intelligence services (SNR) premises, where he did
not have access to his lawyers and family members, Mr. Rukiki was transferred
after 14 days of detention to Ngozi prison where he remains detained to date.
His detention was confirmed by the Tribunal de Grande Instance of Ntahangwa on August 14, 2017. Mr.
Rukiki appealed the decision and on October 27, 2017. On October 31, 2017,
Bujumbura’s Court of appeal upheld the decision and ordered Mr. Rukiki’s remand
in custody. Mr. Rukiki
is accused of “undermining State security” and “rebellion” for his cooperation
with ACAT-Burundi in organising protests against President Nkurunziza’s third
term bid and publishing reports on the human rights situation in Burundi. 
 
In addition, the Observatory remains particularly
concerned by the fate of Ms. Marie-Claudette
Kwizera, Treasurer of the Ligue
Burundaise des Droits de l’Homme « ITEKA », who was forcibly
disappeared on December 10, 2015. To date, Burundian authorities have refused
to provide any information about her fate or whereabouts. 
 
In Cameroon, Ms. Maximilienne Ngo Mbe, Réseau des défenseurs des droits humains en Afrique centrale (REDHAC)’s
Executive Director, has received on several occasions, including on May 30, and
June 10, 2017, death threats via text messages. These threats occur in a
context where REDHAC, through Ms. Ngo Mbe, has publicly spoken about the
repression of the independence movement in Anglophone Cameroon since November
2016.
 
In the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), the Congolese government’s widespread crackdown on human rights and
pro-democracy activists opposing President Joseph Kabila’s effort to remain in
power beyond his constitutionally mandated two-term limit, continues as polices
forces regularly arrest members of pro-democracy and youth movements ahead of or
during protests and sit-ins.
 
On July 14 and 15, 2017, ahead of a country-wide peaceful protest
denouncing the national electoral commission’s failure to publish an electoral
calendar, what many considered to be a critical step to ensuring that elections
will be held by the end of 2017 scheduled on July 31, 2017, the National
Intelligence Agency (ANR) arrested LUCHA members Messrs. Nicolas Mbiya
Kabeya, Josué Cibuabua Kalonda, Kabongo Kadima, and Ms. Mamie
Ndaya in Mbuji-Mayi. The four LUCHA members were freed on September 29,
2017, after two and a half months in arbitrary detention.
 
On July 31, 2017, authorities arrested at least 128 people in nine cities
during protests across the country, including 11 journalists and several human
rights defenders. Amongst them Mr. Timothée Mbuya, lawyer, Justicia Asbl
President and member of the NGO Coalition for the respect of the Constitution, Jean-Pierre
Tshibitshabu, Congolese Civil Society (SOCICO) member and journalist on
Kasumbalesa radio-television, Jean Mulenda, LUCHA member, Eric
Omari Omba and Patrick Mbuya Kwecha, members of the Bomoko
Foundation were arrested in Lubumbashi and to date remain in arbitrary detention
at Kasapa Lubumbashi’ central prison. The five human rights defenders are being
accused of “inciting civil disobedience”. On August 29, 2017, Jean-Pierre
Tshibitshabu, Jean Mulenda, Eric Omba Omari and Patrick Mbuya Kwecha were
sentenced to eight months in prison. The first appeal hearing in their case took
place on October 27, 2017 and was postponed to November 3, 2017. Mr. Timothée
Mbuya will appear before court on November 10, 2017.
 
As pressure was mounting ahead of the August 8,
2017 Presidential elections in Kenya, human rights defenders
involved in monitoring, documenting and observing the electoral campaign and
primaries were attacked, harassed, threatened and even arbitrarily arrested.
Journalists and human rights defenders were also barred from documenting,
entering or forced to leave campaign meetings. Furthermore, during these
political rallies, intimidating statements and negative rhetoric against human
rights defenders have been used by politicians, government and party officials,
accusing them of influencing the outcome of the elections.
 
In the elections’ aftermath, Kenya’s Non-Governmental
Organisation (NGO) Coordination Board de-registered the Kenya Human Rights Commission (KHRC) and the Africa Centre for Open Governance (AfriCOG) and instructed
authorities to restrain their work, on grounds of tax evasion, illegal bank
accounts and illegal hiring of expatriates. The NGO Coordination Board also
requested the Central Bank of Kenya to freeze KHRC’s assets and the Kenya
Revenue Authority (KRA) to recover accrued taxes. Both organisations were at
the frontline of elections monitoring and had been vocal in highlighting
several concerns about the electoral process and the violence in the aftermath
of the electoral results. KHRC is regularly harassed by the NGO Coordination
Board which has been leading a smear campaign against the organisation on
similar baseless grounds since 2015. These same allegations were successfully
challenged by KHRC before the High Court in 2015. Yet, the NGO Coordination Board
revived these matters in late 2016 and now against the backdrop of the disputed
elections.
 
Furthermore,
after the official announcements of the disputed results and the Kenyan Supreme
Court ruling to cancel the elections results and order new elections, human
rights defenders who have witnessed or attempted
to document the excessive and disproportionate use of force by Kenyan
security forces - including the indiscriminate use of teargas and live bullets,
and extra-judicial killings - have subsequently
been targeted by police, harassed and received threats. 
 
In Morocco,
amidst a growing social unrest in the Rif region, which rapidly spread to other
regions of the country, several human rights defenders have been targeted by
the authorities. Mr. Hamid El Mahdaoui,
director of news website Baldil.info,
and Mr. Rabie Al-Albak, journalist
with Baldil.info in Al Hoceima, have
respectively been arbitrarily detained since May 28 and July 20, 2017, for
covering the protests. On September 20, 2017, Mr. Hamid El Mahdaoui was
sentenced by Al Hoceima Court of Appeal to one year in prison and a 20,000
Dirhams fine (approx. 1 798 Euros) under charges of “incitement to commit a
serious offence through public speech”. Mr. Hamid El Mahdaoui is also being
prosecuted under charges of “failure to report attempts to undermine State
security”. The trial is ongoing. Mr. Rabie Al-Albak, is being accused of
receiving foreign funding to carry out propaganda activities and undermining
State security. The Observatory is particularly concerned by the psychological
and physical integrity of the two human rights defenders who have reportedly
started long-lasting hunger strikes to protest their detention and judicial
harassment.
 
As the Parliament of Uganda discusses the
constitutional amendment to lift presidential age limit to
allow President Yoweri Museveni, 73, to run for another term in 2021,
authorities have attempted to silence several human rights organisations. On September 20, 2017, police raided the premises of ActionAid Uganda (AAU) and Great Lakes Institute for Strategic Studies
(GLISS) in Kampala, as well as the house of GLISS Executive Director,
Mr. Godbar Tumushabe. Search warrants included allegations of
“illicit transfer of funds for funding unlawful activities”. Following the
search, on October 4, 2017, Mr. Arthur
Larok, Country Director, and Mr. Bruno
Ssemaganda, Head of Finance of AAU, were summoned to appear before the
Criminal Investigation Directorate (CID) on October 6, 2017. They were both
further interrogated by the CID on October 10, 2017, although no charges have
been levelled against them yet. On October 13, 2017, the Deputy Governor of the
Bank of Uganda ordered the freezing of the five accounts held by AAU, because
of the investigation the CID is conducting against the organisation under
allegations of “conspiracy to commit a felony” and “money laundering”. In
addition, on October 11, 2017, the Ministry of Internal Affairs requested 27
NGOs to submit specific ‘financial information’ to the NGO Bureau within a week.
The information requested include bank statements of the organisations over the
past three years, annual reports clearly stating activities and sources of
funds from 2014 to 2016, all bank account numbers and lists of directors and
executive directors’ names. The list of organisations includes AAU, GLISS and
several organisations working on human rights, development, humanitarian aid
and democracy[1].
Following the publication of the list, on October 14, 2017, State Minister for
Internal Affairs, Mr. Obiga Kania, told the press that “in fact they (the NGOs
listed) should be closed until they submit their financial information”.
 
In Zimbabwe,
on September 24, 2017, Pastor Evan
Mawarire, prominent anti-corruption activist who
led last year’s #ThisFlag protests
which encouraged Zimbabweans to hold protests against President Robert Mugabe
accusing him of corruption, was arbitrarily arrested and subsequently
detained at Harare central police station. Pastor Mawarire had initially been
charged with “subverting a constitutional government” under Section 22 (2) of
the Criminal Law (Codification and Reform) Act, Chapter 9:23. Pastor Mawarire
was taken to the Prosecutor General’s office on September 26, 2017. On the same
day Harare Magistrates Court, ordered his release on the ground that under the
Constitution of Zimbabwe, no one can be detained more than 48 hours without
appearing before a court of law. Charges related to his arrest were
consequently dropped. Similar charges levelled against him in February 2017 were
dropped on September 29, 2017.
 
3. Legislative and administrative restrictions to freedom of association
and assembly, and access to funding for NGOs
 
The worldwide trend undertaken by some
States to restrict freedom of association and hinder the work of human rights
defenders by enacting an arsenal of restrictive laws has been particularly
spreading across Africa, where authorities increasingly aim to control,
paralyse or even eradicate independent civil society, in blatant
breach of basic human rights standards.
 
Civil
society in Egypt is on the brink of collapse as authorities continue to
intensify their wave of attacks against human rights organisations. On May 30,
2017, Egypt’s draconian NGO law was published in the Official Gazette after Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi
officially ratified the repressive NGO law that Egyptian Parliament approved in
November 2016. The law handcuffs NGOs with regulations and strangles their
funding mechanisms, essentially eliminating civil society in Egypt under the
guise of national security.
 
NGOs will
now have one year to register with the, yet to be formed, National Authority
for the Regulation of Non-Governmental Foreign Organisations, created by Law 70
of 2017 for Regulating the Work of Associations and Other Institutions Working
in the Field of Civil Work. This authority includes representatives of Egypt’s
top national security bodies. No representatives from civil society will serve
on it, instead it will be composed of representatives from the Defense Ministry,
the Interior Ministry, the Foreign Ministry, the Justice Ministry, the General
Intelligence Directorate, the Administrative Control Authority, the
International Cooperation Ministry, and the Money Laundering Unit. Under Law 70
of 2017 for Regulating the Work of Associations and Other Institutions Working
in the Field of Civil Work, all NGOs are prohibited from conducting activities
that “harm national security, public order, public morality, or public health,”
vague terms that can be abused to constrain any legitimate activity. The National
Authority will oversee the work of NGOs, including any funding or cooperation
between Egyptian associations and any foreign entity. The law prohibits any
Egyptian government body from making agreements with NGOs without the
authority’s approval.
 
The law also
strictly controls the funding of NGOs. It states that associations must obtain
permission from the authority 30 days in advance to receive donations from
Egyptian entities or individuals inside Egypt and must inform the Social
Solidarity Ministry upon the receipt of such funds. The law further states that
associations may receive funding or grants from foreign entities inside Egypt
or Egyptian or foreign entities outside Egypt as long as the Authority is
notified within 30 days of receipt. The Authority then has the right to reject
the funding within a 60-day period following its notification. Associations may
not use these funds within the 60-day review period.
 
Additionally,
the law gives the government the authority to monitor and challenge NGOs’
day-to-day activities, from choices in leadership to the schedule of internal
meetings, creating a blanket and ambiguous provision authorizing the Egyptian
government to cancel a foreign NGO’s license at any time if its work is deemed
to be harming national security, public safety or disturbing public order, or
per the principle of reciprocity. The Observatory denounces a legislation
contravening Egypt’s commitment to international and regional human rights law
and undermining the essence of the right to freedom of association itself.
 
Egyptian authorities
also continue their relentless judicial harassment of civil society
organisations and human rights defenders as part of the case known as the “foreign funding case
No. 173”, a five-year-old investigation into the funding and
registration of independent human rights groups. 
 
Mr.
Mohamed Zaree, Egypt Director of the
Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies (CIHRS), and winner of 2017 Martin
Ennals Award, was summoned to appear on May 15, and 24, 2017, before the
investigative judge within the framework of the “foreign funding case No. 173”. During
the interrogation session, Mr. Zaree was accused of harming Egypt’s reputation
by contributing to the country’s Universal Periodic Review (UPR) report,
undermining the country’s reputation including before the European Parliament
and drafting false reports about the human rights situation in Egypt through
his work at CIHRS. Mr. Zaree is charged — jointly with others human rights defenders
— with receiving foreign funds for an unregistered entity (CIHRS) and using
them for unlawful activities, with the intent of harming national security and
interests. The Observatory recalls that CIHRS was amongst the 37 NGOs listed in
the 2011 Government Fact-Finding Committee report that could be targeted under
the “foreign funding
case No. 173”. On September 17, 2016, the Cairo
Criminal Court in Zeinhom ordered the freezing of CIHRS’ assets and those of
its Director, Mr. Bahey el din Hassan, as well as those of several other
defenders and NGOs. Several CIHRS members have also experienced various acts of
harassment and threats.
 
Further
infringements to the right to freedom of association were reported as on September
20, 2017, a committee from the Investment Authority, accompanied by National
Security officers and a police van, entered ECRF’s headquarters office in
Cairo, claiming to hold a warrant to close down the organisation and attempted
to put a wax seal on the office’s door on grounds that remain unknown. No
warrant was effectively presented. Lawyers present at the office rejected these
claims and prevented the closure arguing that it would be illegal since ECRF is
a law firm operating in accordance with national legislation. Nonetheless, the
committee threatened to come again. This unannounced raid and closing attempt
occurs several days after the Egyptian government blocked ECRF’s website on
September 5, 2017, and one month after the publication of ECRF’s report on
enforced disappearances in Egypt. The report documented 378 cases of enforced
disappearances between August 2016 and August 2017, and labelled the Egyptian
security apparatuses as the main actor to be held accountable for these grave
human rights violations.
 
The
Observatory expresses its concerns over the on-going attempt by the Nigerian
National Assembly to pass a NGO regulatory
bill to control the operations of NGOs in violation of Nigeria’s
constitutional guarantees of freedom of association and assembly. The bill seeks to establish an NGO Regulatory
Commission competent to register civil society organisations. According to the
bill, the Commission may refuse the registration of an organisation, which
would be mandatory every two years, if it deems its activities to not be in the
national interests. As drafted, the NGO Bill
would enlarge governmental powers to regulate,
monitor the funding and operation of civil society organisations. Accordingly,
civil society organisations are under the obligation to disclose sources of
funding ahead of any project implementation. Furthermore, the use of funds
without the commission’s permission would amount to a crime punishable by a
prison term of up to 18 months.
 
In Tanzania,
the implementation of repressive laws has allowed the ban of eight media houses
and the arrest of more than twenty-seven journalists and human rights
defenders. Since 2010, the government of Tanzania has enacted several laws
putting additional barriers to online freedom of expression and to the work of
human rights defenders. Among these new laws, the Cybercrimes Act, which came
into force in September 2015, has been used as a tool to censor dissent voices
and journalists and to further restrict the right to freedom of expression. The
judicial harassment of JamiiMedia Managing Director Mr. Maxence Melo and shareholder Mr. Mike William illustrates this worrying pattern. On December 15,
2016, the police searched both JamiiMedia premises and Mr. Maxence Melo’s
home without any warrant. Furthermore, the police interrogated some Jamii Media
staff members at their office premises in Mikocheni, Dar es Salaam, and later
at the Central Police Station. The police kept Mr. Melo in custody for
more than 48 hours without interrogation and in absence of charges against him,
in violation of Tanzanian legislation which sets a four-hour limit for police
interrogation without charges. However, on December 16, 2016, that the Resident
Magistrate Court of Dar-es-Salaam at Kisutu indicted Mr. Maxence Melo under
three sets of charges: “obstruction of a police investigation” under the 2015
Cyber Crimes Act; “not complying with an order of disclosure of data”; as well
as “managing a domain not registered in Tanzania” in contraventi 