Bangladesh:  Alleged extrajudicial killing of Mr. Mohammad Atear Rahman by RAB members
January 10, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2013 / JanuaryBangladesh: Alleged extrajudicial killing of Mr. Mohammad Atear Rahman by RAB members 
Case BGD 100113
Alleged
extrajudicial killing/ Risk of impunity
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Bangladesh.

Brief
description of the situation
The
International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by ODHIKAR, a member of
OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the alleged extrajudicial killing, on 12
September 2012, of Mr. Mohammad Atear Rahman, also known by locals as Tofa Molla, a
30-year-old farmer originally from Baroipara village in Kushtia district,
living as tenant in Ataikula village in Pabna district. 
According
to the information received, on 11 September 2012, at around 8 pm five individuals,
who identified themselves as RAB-12 officials (Rapid Action Battalion[1]) picked
up Mr. Mohammad Atear Rahman from his house without providing any information.
They entered into the house while Mr. Atear Rahman was having dinner and took
him with them to an unknown location. 
On 12
September 2012, at around 7:00 am Mr. Mohammad Atear Rahman’s wife learned from
a neighbour that her husband had died in the kashbon[2]
of Chorshadipur under Kumarkhali police station. She went to Chorshadipur
where locals told her that last night RAB had shot a man to death and took his
body away. A post mortem was reportedly conducted in Kushtia General Hospital
and Mr. Mohammad Atear Rahman’s body was later handed over to his family.
According to witnesses, the body bore three gunshot wounds on the chest.    
According
to the First Information Report (FIR) registered before Kushtia Court, RAB members
denied having arrested Mr. Mohammad Atear Rahman on 11 September 2012 and claimed
that Mr. Mohammad Atear Rahman was shot and killed in “crossfire” after he and
his alleged accomplices opened fire on RAB early on 12 September 2012, in the kashbon
area. 
The
International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned about the circumstances
surrounding the arrest and killing of Mr.
Mohammad Atear Rahman, which seem to suggest that he may have been victim of an
extrajudicial killing. The RAB has repeatedly used “crossfire killing” to cover
extrajudicial killing. OMCT calls upon the competent authorities to
carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into
the circumstances of these events, in accordance with international human
rights standards, such as the UN Principle on the Effective Prevention and
Investigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions, the result of
which must be made public, in order to bring those responsible before a
competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or
administrative sanctions as provided by law.
OMCT recalls that the authorities have to fulfil their obligations under
international human rights law to protect the right to life and to bringing to
justice those responsible for violating this right.
Action requested
Please
write to the authorities in Bangladesh urging them to:
i.              
Carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and
impartial investigation into the circumstances of the arrest and killing
of Mr. Mohammad Atear Rahman, in accordance with international human rights
standards, such as the UN Principle on the Effective Prevention and
Investigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions, the result of
which must be made public, in order to bring those responsible before a
competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply adequate sanctions as
provided by law;
ii.             
Guarantee, in all circumstances, the
physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Mohammad Atear Rahman family members;
iii.           
Ensure
that an effective remedy, including the right to full redress with
compensation, be granted to the victim’s
family;
iv.           
Guarantee
the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.

Addresses
Ø Ms. Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, Gona
Bhaban, Old Sangsad Bhaban, Tejgaon, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Fax: +880 2 8113243,
Email: info@pmo.gov.bd
Ø Mr. Muhiuddin Khan Alamgir, Minister for Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, H-16, R-25, B-A, Banani Dhaka-1213,
Bangladesh, Tel: 880-2-8821334, 9883737, Email: mkalamgir@yahoo.com
Ø Barrister Shafique Ahmed, Minister for Law, Justice and
Parliamentary Affairs, Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs,
Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Fax: +88-02-7168557, Email: info@minlaw.gov.bd
Ø Mr. Hassan Mahmood Khandker, Inspector General of Police, Police
Headquarters, Phoenix Road, Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh, Fax: +88-02-9563362,
9563363, Email: ig@police.gov.bd
Ø Ambassador Mr. Abdul Hannan, Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic
of Bangladesh to the United Nations in Geneva, 65 rue de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva,
Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 46 16, E-mail: mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.int
Please
also write to the embassies of Bangladesh in your respective country.
***
Geneva,
10 January 2013
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.



[1] The Rapid Action Battalion (RAB) was established in
2004 as a force to assist the police in combating crime. It is made up of
members of the armed forces and the police. 


[2] A cotton field located nearby riverside. 