Bangladesh:  Joint Open Letter to the Prime Minister of Bangladesh on the continued detention of Adilur Rahman Khan
September 12, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2013 / SeptemberBangladesh: Joint Open Letter to the Prime Minister of Bangladesh on the continued detention of Adilur Rahman KhanSeptember 11, 2013


Sheikh Hasina WazedPrime MinisterGovernment of the People's Republic of BangladeshOld Sangsad BhabanTejagaonDhaka - 1215BangladeshRe: Continued Detention of Advocate Adilur Rahman Khan

Dear Prime Minister,

We are writing to express our deep concern over the arrest of Adilur
 Rahman Khan on August 10, 2013 and his continued detention in 
connection with his work in the defense of human rights. We urge the 
relevant authorities to release Mr. Khan immediately and drop all 
charges.

Adulur Rahman Khan is one of Bangladesh’s most prominent human 
rights defenders and the Secretary of Odhikar. He is also a member of 
the General Assembly of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT); 
member of the Executive Committee of the Asian Forum for Human Rights 
and Development (FORUM-ASIA); and a board member of the Asian Network 
for Free Elections (ANFREL) Odhikar is also a member organization of the
 International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and an affiliate of 
the International Commission of Jurists (ICJ).

Odhikar and Mr. Khan have long campaigned against extrajudicial 
killings, disappearances, torture, and violations of the rights to 
freedom of expression, assembly and association, including when members 
of your party, the Awami League, were being persecuted under the 
previous caretaker government. It is sad and ironic that your government
 is now prosecuting Mr. Khan for his work in documenting human rights 
violations.

Mr. Khan’s arrest and subsequent detention under the Information and
 Communication Technology Act, 2006 appears to be aimed at intimidating 
and silencing critics of your government. The recent move by the 
government to amend the Information and Communication Technology Act, 
2006 to increase sentences, make certain offenses non-bailable, and 
authorize the police to arrest without obtaining a warrant deepens our 
concerns that Mr. Khan’s arrest is designed to silence him, Odhikar, and
 other critics.

According to the police, Mr. Khan was arrested pursuant to section 
54 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and section 57 of the Information 
and Communication Technology Act, 2006. On August 11, the day following 
his arrest, Mr. Khan was presented before the Magistrate’s Court and was
 remanded to five days policy custody for alleged offenses under section
 54 involving  clauses 1 and 2 of Section 57 of the Information and 
Communication Technology Act (ICT) 2006 for publishing in an Odhikar 
fact-finding report allegedly false images and information about human 
rights abuses by government security forces during mass demonstrations 
by the Hefazat-e-Islami movement in Dhaka on May 5 and 6, 2013. 
Odhikar’s report stated that 61 persons had been killed in operations by
 security forces between May 5-6, a figure that is strongly contested by
 your government.

Mr. Khan was not given access to lawyers until he was produced 
before the Magistrate on the afternoon of August 11. The August 11 
remand order was subsequently overturned by the High Court Division of 
the Bangladesh Supreme Court on August 12. Mr. Khan was sent to the 
Dhaka Central Jail on August 13, and later transferred to the Kashimpur 
Jail number 1. We ask you to ensure that Mr. Khan is kept safe and 
afforded all of his human rights while in the custody of government 
authorities.

The charges against Mr. Khan and his Odhikar colleague, ASM 
Nasiruddin Elan, submitted through a charge sheet by the DB Police on 
September 4, 2013, are a serious encroachment on their and other members
 of Odhikar’s right to freedom of expression, and will have a chilling 
effect on other human rights defenders and other critical voices 
throughout Bangladesh.

The case was transferred to the newly-formed Cyber Crimes Tribunal. 
We are disturbed that the second bail petition submitted by Mr. Khan’s 
lawyers was rejected by the court on September 9.

We remind you that Bangladesh is a party to the International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). Under Article 19 of the 
ICCPR, everyone has the right to freedom of expression, including the 
right to seek, to receive, and to impart information. As the UN Human 
Rights Committee has consistently underscored, laws restricting this 
right must never be invoked to prosecute human rights defenders for 
disseminating information of legitimate public interest.

As the United Nations Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of
 Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and Protect 
Universally Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms 
(Declaration on Human Rights Defenders), makes clear under Article 12, 
the State must take all necessary measures to ensure the protection of 
human rights defenders from any violence, threat, retaliation pressure 
or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of the legitimate 
exercise of rights, including the freedom of expression.

We urge you to take immediate measures to uphold Khan’s rights under
 Articles 7, 9 and 14 of the ICCPR, which concern respectively his right
 to be free from torture and ill-treatment, his right to liberty and his
 right to a fair trial. Specifically Khan must be presumed innocent 
until proven guilty; be informed promptly of the charges against him; 
have access to a lawyer of his choice; receive a pre-trial release or a 
hearing to challenge pre-trial detention without delay; receive a public
 hearing before an impartial, independent tribunal established by law; 
and be protected from being subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman
 or degrading treatment or punishment.

We are greatly concerned that Foreign Minister Dipu Moni, when 
speaking to the diplomatic corps in Dhaka on August 19, 2013, stated 
that any international presence in court during proceedings against 
Mr. Khan amounted to “direct interference with…and intimidation of our 
judicial process.” In accordance with ICCPR article 14, trials must be 
conducted transparently and must be open to the public. We call on you 
to publicly retract this statement, and to make clear that observers, 
whether national or international, are welcome to monitor proceedings 
against Mr. Khan. We are also concerned that speaking in Washington, 
D.C. on September 5 she said that the government accepted criticism, but
 not “undue” criticism. Nothing in international law allows a government
 to penalize “undue” criticism. We remind you that your party complained
 bitterly about restrictions on free expression while serving as the 
parliamentary opposition to previous governments.

In official statements, members of your government stated that 
Mr. Khan was arrested because Odhikar refused to share information about
 the report, and claimed that therefore the report is not credible. 
Odhikar cited a fear of government intimidation or retaliation against 
the victims’ families as the reason that it has not given the 
information directly to the government. Human rights organizations, like
 journalists, should be able to maintain confidentiality in respect of 
sources information in order to carry out their essential functions.

Odhikar did agree to share their list of victims’ names and 
addresses with an independent commission, which Odhikar is urging the 
government to establish , under the Commission of Inquiries Act 1956, to
 look into the events of that night. Given the well-documented history 
of torture and ill-treatment by Bangladesh security forces against 
persons who report government abuses, this request is eminently 
reasonable.

We understand that the relevant authorities are continuing to search
 for the Odhikar list. We are concerned about the police raid on 
Odhikar’s offices on the night of August 11 during which authorities 
seized computers and documents containing, inter alia, confidential 
material and which might contain this list of victims and their contact 
details, in whatever form.

The seizure of these materials constitutes a grave violation of the 
right to privacy, guaranteed under Article 17 of the ICCPR, of the 
victims and witnesses who have trusted Odhikar with their information. 
We urge you to immediately issue instructions to the authorities 
examining the computers to safeguard all personal information and 
identifying details found on the computers—including that of victims and
 witnesses, as well as involved Odhikar staff members —and to ensure 
that no harm comes to those who are named in the computers or other 
confiscated materials.

Shortly after Mr. Khan’s arrest your cabinet approved amendments to 
the Information and Communication Technology Act, 2006. We understand 
that the amendments would make some offenses non-bailable and would 
empower law enforcement officials to arrest persons without a warrant. 
The amendments, as reported, also set a minimum punishment of seven 
years imprisonment for any offences, regardless of the seriousness or 
nature of the offense, and that the maximum punishment under the Act has
 been extended from 10 years to 14 years. At the outset, we express 
serious concerns relating to the form and substance of these amendments 
as reported, which will seriously hinder the exercise of freedom of 
expression. Further, we remind you that international law prohibits the 
application of new laws retroactively. Any retrospective application of 
these amendments would constitute a violation of Article 15 of the 
ICCPR.

We urge your government to reconsider its approach in this case and that you take all measures necessary to:

 Ensure Mr. Khan’s immediate release, drop all 
charges against him, and end the harassment of Odhikar and other human 
rights defenders or critics of the government exercising their right to 
freedom of expression; Ensure that the physical and 
psychological integrity of Mr. Khan is protected at all times and that 
he is safe from torture and any other cruel, inhuman and degrading 
treatment while detained, whether in jail or any other place of 
detention; Ensure that Mr. Khan has ongoing privileged and 
confidential access to lawyers of his choice with whom he is able to 
communicate privately in confidence, and that any trial that may take 
place against him is open to the public, including to international 
observers; Return all material confiscated from Odhikar’s 
offices and issue instructions that confidential information contained 
in those materials are to be safeguarded; Ensure that the 
confidential information is not used to further harass or intimidate 
anyone at Odhikar, or those who provided them any information; 
Reconsider and retract the amendments to the Information Communication 
and Technology Act 2006, and ensure that the amended provisions are not 
applied retroactively and take steps to ensure that its provisions will 
not be abused in the future.If your government does not agree with the claims of Odhikar or any 
other group, the appropriate response is to engage in a public debate. 
Criminal sanctions for peaceful expression are not acceptable in a 
democratic society. Arresting those who disagree with government views 
suggests that Bangladesh is heading in a dangerous and authoritarian 
direction. This is in direct contradiction to pledges you and members of
 your government made to the Bangladeshi people and international 
community upon taking office after the repressive period of the prior 
“caretaker” government.

Thank you for your attention and we look forward to receiving a written response from you on this important matter.

Sincerely yours,

Anoop Sukumaran, CoordinatorAsia Pacific Refugee Rights Network (APRRN)

Suhas Chakma, DirectorAsian Center for Human Rights (ACHR)

Evelyn Serrano, Executive DirectorAsian Forum for Human Rights and Development (FORUM-ASIA)

Damaso Magbual, ChairmanAsian Network for Free Elections (ANFREL)

Ko Bo Kyi, General Secretary Assistance Association for Political Prisoners (Burma)

Kirity Roy, SecretaryBanglar Manabadhikar Suraksha Mancha (MASUM)India

Ou Virak, President Cambodian Center for Human Rights

Boonthan Verawongse, Secretary GeneralCampaign Committee for Human Rights (CCHR) and Peace and Human Rights Resource Center (PHRC)Thailand

Prof. Sarah Joseph, DirectorCastan Centre for Human Rights Law, Monash University Australia

Pakiasoothy Saravanamuttu, Executive DirectorCentre for Policy AlternativesSri Lanka

Mandeep Tiwana, Head of Policy and ResearchCIVICUS: World Alliance for Citizen Participation

Robert Hårdh, Executive DirectorCivil Rights Defenders

Haris Azhar, Executive CoordinatorCommission for the Disappearances and Victims of Violence (KontraS)Indonesia

Pornpen Khongkachonkiet, DirectorCross Cultural Foundation (CCF)Thailand

Aung Myo Min, DirectorEquality Myanmar

Sue Gunawardena-Vaughn, Ph. D., Director, Southeast AsiaFreedom House

Mary Lawlor, Executive DirectorFront Line Defenders

Somchai Homlaor, ChairpersonHuman Rights and Development Foundation (HRDF)Thailand

Kazuko Ito, Secretary GeneralHuman Rights NowJapan

Brad Adams, Director, Asia DivisionHuman Rights Watch

Gus Miclat, Executive DirectorInitiatives for International Dialogue (IID)Philippines

Yan Christian Warinussy, Executive DirectorInstitution of Research, Analyzing, Development for Legal Aid/ LP3BH (Papua)Indonesia

Sam Zarifi, Asia Pacific Regional DirectorInternational Commission of Jurists

Karim Lahidji, PresidentInternational Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)

Phil Lynch, DirectorInternational Service for Human Rights (ISHR)

Angkhana Neelapaijit, ChairpersonJustice for Peace Foundation (JPF)Thailand

Cristina Palabay, Secretary-General KarapatanPhilippines

Max de Mesa, Chairperson Philippine Alliance of Human Rights Advocates (PAHRA)Philippines

Adul Kheawborriboon, ChairpersonRelatives Committee of May 1992 HeroesThailand

Metha Matkhao, CoordinatorSocial Democracy Think TankThailand

Tapan Kumar Bose, Secretary GeneralSouth Asia Forum for Human Rights (SAFHR)

Gerald Staberock, Secretary GeneralWorld Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) 