Bahrain:  Arbitrary arrest and detention of Messrs. Abduljalil Al-Sengais, Abdulghani Ali Issa Al-Khanjar, Jaffar Al-Hessabi and Mohammed Saeed
August 18, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2010 / AugustBahrain: Arbitrary arrest and detention of Messrs. Abduljalil Al-Sengais, Abdulghani Ali Issa Al-Khanjar, Jaffar Al-Hessabi and Mohammed SaeedBHR 004 / 0810 / OBS 101
Arbitrary detention / Judicial harassment / Hindrances to freedom of peaceful assembly
Bahrain
August 18, 2010
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Bahrain.
Description of the situation:
The Observatory has been informed by the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR) about the arbitrary arrest and detention of Mr. Abduljalil Al-Sengais, Spokesperson and Director of the Human Rights Bureau of the political party the Haq Movement for Civil Liberties and Democracy, Mr. Abdulghani Ali Issa Al-Khanjar, Spokesperson of the National Committee for Martyrs and Victims of Torture (NCMVT), Mr. Jaffar Al-Hessabi, a bahraini human right activist involved in the fight against torture who has been living in the United Kingdom (UK) for 15 years, and Mr. Mohammed Saeed, a board member of BCHR .
According to the information received, on August 13, 2010, early in the morning, Mr. Abduljalil Al-Sengais was detained at Bahrain International Airport while he was returning from the UK with his family. On August 5, 2010, he had participated to a seminar on the situation of human rights in Bahrain at the House of Lords and had addressed the resurgence of torture, the increase of discrimination, the decline of public liberties and the deterioration of the environmental situation in the country. Mr. Al-Sengais had also visited several international human rights organisations during his stay in the UK.
On the same day, at around 5.30 pm, the Special Forces violently dispersed with tear-gas, sound bombs and rubber bullets a peaceful gathering set up in solidarity in front of Mr. Al-Sengais' house, inflecting several injuries among the demonstrators.
Furthermore, at around 3 am on August 15, 2010, Mr. Abdulghani Ali Issa Al-Khanjar, was arrested at his home by the Security Forces. His computer and mobile phones were also confiscated.
Messrs. Abduljalil Al-Sengais, Abdulghani Ali Issa Al-Khanjar are accused of “forming an organised network aiming at weakening the security and the stability of the country” under the Anti-Terrorism Law and the Criminal Code. According to Government representatives, this network would be involved in “illegal practices and other acts that would harm the stability of the Kingdom of Bahrain and its civil peace”, and would have been calling for “violence and terrorist acts”. The Public Prosecutor’s Office reportedly issued a warrant to search Mr. Al-Sengais' house and belongings and, as of issuing this Urgent Appeal investigations would be ongoing to “uncover the remaining members of the network”.
Additionally, on August 16, at 11:30 pm, Mr. Jaffar Al-Hessabi was arrested at Bahrain International Airport, and on August 17 at 3 am, Mr. Mohammed Saeed was arrested at his home. As of issuing this Urgent Appeal, the four human rights defenders remained detained; however, no information could be obtained regarding their place and conditions of detention.
Mr. Abduljalil Al-Sengais had already been arrested in January 2009 along with other members of the Haq Movement or Civil Liberties and Democracy in relation to an alleged “terror plot” before being granted a royal pardon on April 12, 2009[1]. In February 2010, Mr. Abdulghani Ali Issa Al-Khanjar, together with Messrs. Nabeel Rajab, BCHR President, and Mohamed Al-Maskati, President of the Bahrain Youth Society for Human Rights (BYSHR), were subjected to a slandering media campaign. The three human rights defenders were accused in several media, among other things, of having “links with foreign Governments”, of having committed “acts of violence using Molotov cocktails”, of “inciting the youth to commit violence against the State” and of “defaming the State before international organisations”[2].
Additionally, within the same context, four religious and political activists who have recently been involved in peaceful protest actions for the release of political prisoners have also been arrested between August 15 and 17: Sheikh Mohammed Al-Moqdad, Sheikh Saeed Al-Nori, Sheikh Mirza Al-Mahroos and Sheikh Abdulhadi Al-Mukhuder.
The Observatory condemns the arbitrary detention of Messrs. Abduljalil Al-Sengais, Abdulghani Ali Issa Al-Khanjar, Jaffar Al-Hessabi and Mohammed Saeed, which seems to only aim at sanctioning their human rights activities, and fears for their physical and psychological integrity. Therefore, the Observatory calls upon the Bahraini authorities to take prompt action in order to disclose their whereabouts and to immediately and unconditionally release them.
Additionally, the Observatory urges the Bahraini authorities to ensure the ability of all human rights defenders and organisations in Bahrain to carry out their work without hindrances in accordance with the Bahraini legislation.
Actions requested:
The Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to:

 Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Messrs. Abduljalil Al-Sengais, Abdulghani Ali Issa Al-Khanjar, Jaffar Al-Hessabi and Mohammed Saeed, as well as of all human rights defenders in Bahrain;
 Take prompt action in order to disclose the whereabouts of Messrs. Abduljalil Al- Sengais, Abdulghani Ali Issa Al-Khanjar, Jaffar Al-Hessabi and Mohammed Saeed and ensure their immediate and unconditionally release since their detention is arbitrary as it only aims at sanctioning their human rights activities;
 Put an end to any acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Messrs. Abduljalil Al-Sengais, Abdulghani Ali Issa Al-Khanjar, Jaffar Al-Hessabi and Mohammed Saeed, and against all human rights defenders in Bahrain; 
Conform in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly, in particular its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually or in association with others, to promote the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, and its Article 12.2 which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and international instruments ratified by Bahrain.

Addresses:

Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA , King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 587
Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tel: +973 172 27 555; Fax : +973 172 12 6032
Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and Islamic Affairs, Tel: +973 175 31 333; Fax: +973 175 31 284
Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the United Nations in Geneva, 1 chemin Jacques-Attenville, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, CP 39, 1292 Chambésy, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch

Please also write to diplomatic representations of Bahrain in your respective countries. 
*** 
Paris-Geneva, August 18, 2010
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need. The Observatory was the winner of the 1998 Human Rights Prize of the French Republic.
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org


Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
 

    [1]See Observatory Urgent Appeal BHR 001/0109/OBS 003, 003.1 and 003.2, respectively issued on January 7, February 6 and February 24, 2009.
     
[2]See Urgent Appeal BHR 001/0210/OBS 020, issued on February 18, 2010. 