Viet Nam:  Viet Nam - EU: Release of rights and pro-democracy activists litmus test for human rights dialogue
January 10, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Viet Nam / 2012 / JanuaryViet Nam: Viet Nam - EU: Release of rights and pro-democracy activists litmus test for human rights dialogue Vietnamese_Viet Nam - EU: Release of rights and pro-democracy activists litmus test for human rights dialogue3 pages / 491 KB                                                                                                                                                  
PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY - 
VCHR
 
Viet Nam - EU: Release of rights and pro-democracy activists 
litmus test for human rights dialogue 
 
Paris-Geneva-Bangkok, January 10, 2012. The first full-fledged 
human rights dialogue of the European Union with Viet Nam needs to be 
accompanied with the release of all human rights defenders currently imprisoned, 
in detention, or under house arrest, said the Vietnam Committee on Human Rights 
(VCHR) and the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT).
 
On January 12, 2012, the EU will hold its first full-fledged, 
capital-based annual human rights dialogue with Viet Nam in Hanoi. The upgrading 
of the human rights dialogue follows the conclusion of an EU-Viet Nam 
Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA) that is expected to be signed in 
mid-2012. The dialogue will take place as the crackdown on dissent and 
imprisonment of human rights defenders continue since late 2009, with the latest 
sentences handed down just less than two weeks ago.
 
“Freedom of human rights defenders to operate without fear or 
reprisals should be high on the agenda of the first dialogue, and the EU must 
take all necessary steps with sufficient political will to press the Vietnamese 
government to protect them, rather than throwing them in prison”, said 
Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH President. 
 
On December 29, 2011, a court in Nghe An province in central Viet Nam 
sentenced Ms. Ho Thi Bich Khuong and Pastor Nguyen Trung Ton, two 
land rights and social justice defenders, to, respectively, five and two years 
in prison for “activities undermining the State” and “circulating propaganda 
against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam” under Article 88 of the Criminal 
Code, after the police seized at Ms. Bich Khuong’s home 78 articles calling for 
human rights. Ms. Bich Khuong and Pastor Ton were also sentenced to three and 
two years, respectively, under house arrest in addition to their imprisonment. 
Vietnamese State-media also accused Ms. Bich Khuong and Pastor Ton of 
“collecting documents and writing articles which tarnished the reputation of the 
Communist Party and the Socialist regime”. Ms. Bich Khuong was also accused of 
giving interviews to overseas media and joining pro-democracy movements with the 
aim of “opposing the State”. They are both detained in Nghe An province. Ms Bich 
Khuong has announced her intent to appeal the sentence.
 
Ms. Bich Khuong and Pastor Ton are among over dozens of human rights 
defenders, writers and activists harassed, arrested, detained, or sentenced to 
jail terms for their peaceful pro-rights activities in the last two years 
(please see below a non-exhaustive list of human rights defenders and activists of particular 
concern in detention or under house arrest in Viet Nam compiled by the 
VCHR).
 
Vietnamese Government spokespersons and diplomats regularly make 
statements proclaiming its respect for human rights in law and in practice. In 
February 2011, Viet Nam announced its intention to run for a seat on the UN 
Human Rights Council for 2013-2016, a bid that is officially supported by fellow 
ASEAN Member States.
 
“Vietnam apparently believes it can make human rights commitments 
for foreign consumption while doing the exact opposite domestically,” said 
Vo Van Ai, President of the VCHR. “It is high time that the EU make Vietnam 
answer for this discrepancy and prioritize human rights in its bilateral 
relations with Vietnam in order to halt the on-going assault on fundamental 
freedoms on the ground”. Mr. Ai particularly urged the EU to press for the 
release of Buddhist leader Thich Quang Do, who is held under de facto house arrest without any 
justification or charge for his peaceful human rights advocacy.
 
“The liberty of those defending the rights of others is the 
evident precondition for any genuine dialogue worth its name. Genuine and 
measurable progress in this field must be the benchmark for the success of such 
dialogue”, said Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General. 

 
For more information please contact:
·    VCHR: Vo Tran Nhat: +33 1 45 98 30 85
·    FIDH: Karine Appy, Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18
·    OMCT: 
Delphine Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 39
 
 
Non-exhaustive list of human rights defenders and activists of 
particular concern
in detention or under house arrest in Viet 
Nam
 
- Unified Buddhist Church of 
Vietnam (UBCV) Supreme Patriarch Thich Quang Do, under house arrest 
without trial at the Thanh Minh Zen Monastery in Ho Chi Minh City. He is 
deprived of the right to travel, his communications are censored, and all visits 
monitored. He is deprived of basic citizenship rights, such as the obligatory 
residence permit (ho khau), without which one is considered an illegal citizen. 
Thich Quang Do has spent over 29 years in prison, house arrest and internal 
exile for his peaceful appeals for religious freedom, human rights and 
democracy. He has been declared a victim of arbitrary detention by the UN 
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (Opinion 18/2005). 
 
- Although blogger Mr. 
Nguyen Van Hai (pen name Dieu Cay), founding member of the Club of Free 
Journalists, should have been released from prison in October 2010 after completing his 
prison term, he remains detained under new charges of “propaganda against the 
State”, which were brought against him on October 20, 2010. He had been sentenced to two and a half years in prison on 
trumped-up charges of “tax evasion” in September 2008. His family has not been allowed to see him since then and his 
current whereabouts are unknown. On July 5, 2011, Dieu Cay’s wife was told by 
Lt.-Colonel Dang Hong Diep of the Ho Chi Minh City Security Police 
Investigations Department that Dieu Cay had “lost his hand (or arm)” in 
prison.
 
- On April 4, 2011, Mr. Cu 
Huy Ha Vu, a legal expert and defender of environmental and political 
rights, was sentenced to seven years in prison and three years under house 
arrest by the Hanoi People’s Court on charges of “spreading propaganda against 
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam” (Article 88 of the Criminal 
Code), following a trial during which he was denied his right to a fair and 
public hearing by a competent, independent and impartial tribunal. His sentence was upheld at an appeal trial on August 2, 2011. 
Two weeks before his arrest on November 5, 2010, on October 21, 2010, 
Mr. Ha Vu had filed a lawsuit against the Prime Minister for signing Decree 136 
in 2006, which prohibits class-action petitions.
 
- Freelance journalist Mr. 
Truong Minh Duc, sentenced to five years in prison at an unfair trial in 
Kien Giang province on July 18, 2008, charged with “taking advantage of 
democratic freedoms and rights to abuse the interests of the State” (Article 258 
of the Criminal Code), for writing about official corruption in Kien Giang. Mr. 
Truong Minh Duc’s wife reports that her husband is in very poor health, and is 
currently subjected to extremely harsh detention conditions. He was transferred 
in early April 2010 from the main K2 camp of Xuan Loc prison in Dong Nai 
province, where he was held since 2007, to a section in the jungle known as K4. 

 
- Writer Mr. Nguyen Xuan 
Nghia, sentenced on October 9, 2009 by Haiphong People’s Court to six years 
in prison and three years’ “probationary detention” (i.e. house arrest) under 
Article 88 of the Criminal Code on “conducting propaganda against the Socialist 
Republic of Viet Nam” after writing and advocating for human rights and actions 
calling for democratic reforms.
 
- Ms. Pham Thanh Nghien, 
sentenced by the People’s Court in Haiphong on January 29, 2010 to four years in 
prison followed by three years under house arrest on charges of “conducting 
propaganda against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam” (Article 88 of the 
Criminal Code) for organising peaceful demonstrations and advocating land 
rights.
 
- Internet entrepreneur and 
blogger Mr. Tran Huynh Duy Thuc, a pro-democracy activist who advocated 
for more freedoms in his writings, sentenced to 16 years in prison and five 
years’ house arrest at the Ho Chi Minh City People’s Court on January 20, 2010 
on charges of “activities aimed at subverting the people's administration” 
(Article 79 of the Criminal Code), using the Internet and blogs to circulate 
democratic ideas. Along with a group of activists, he was initially accused 
under Article 88 of the Criminal Code on conducting anti-Socialist propaganda, 
and their “confessions” were broadcast on the State-run television. The charges 
were suddenly changed to Article 79, a more serious crime which incurs the death 
penalty. Tran Huynh Duy Thuc received a harsher sentence that his colleagues 
because he refused to admit he had committed a crime and demand clemency. The 
other members of this group are:
- French-trained IT engineer and blogger Mr. Nguyen Tien 
Trung, sentenced to seven years in prison and three years house arrest for 
using the Internet to call for political reforms;
- Businessman Mr. Le Thang Long, sentenced to five years in 
prison and three years house arrest (reduced to three and a half years on 
appeal), also for publishing pro-democracy appeals on the 
Internet;
- Mr. Tran Kim Anh, former lieutenant-colonel in the People’s 
Army, was sentenced to five and a half years in prison and three years house 
arrest under the same charge on December 28, 2009 at the People’s Court in Thai 
Binh province for publishing pro-democracy articles on the 
Internet.
 
- Mr. Vi Duc Hoi, a pro-democracy activist who has extensively 
written on corruption and injustice in Viet Nam, was arrested on October 27, 
2010. On January 26, 2011, he was convicted of “spreading anti-Government 
propaganda” and sentenced to eight years of imprisonment, followed by five years 
of house arrest. On April 26, 2011, his jail sentence was reduced to five 
years by an appeals court in northern Lang Son province, to be followed by 
three years’ house arrest.
 
- Messrs. Nguyen Van Lia 
and Tran Hoai An, practitioners of an unofficial religious sect and 
advocates of the respect of the right to religious freedom, were found guilty on 
December 12, 2011 of the charges of “abusing democratic freedoms to infringe 
upon the interests of the State” under Article 258 of the Criminal Code by the 
People’s Court of Cho Moi District in southern An Giang province. They were 
respectively sentenced to five and three years of prison.
 
- Journalist Mr. Nguyen Van Khuong (pen name 
Hoang Khuong), a reporter on the official Tuoi Tre (Youth) 
newspaper, was arrested on January 2, 2012 for exposing police corruption. He is 
in custody in Ho Chi Minh City on charges of “professional shortcomings”. In 
July and September 2011, Hoang Khuong wrote a series of articles revealing 
bribes received by traffic police. One policeman was subsequently arrested. On 
November 28, 2011, the Ho Chi Minh City Investigation Police complained about 
the articles and called on Tuoi Tre to withdraw Hoang Khuong’s press 
card. At the same time, the Ho Chi Minh City Police Newspaper published 
several articles denouncing Hoang Khuong and calling for “punishment” against 
him. On December 3, 2011, Tuoi Tre’s Editorial Board suspended 
him. 