Observatory Annual Report 2011 - Steadfast in Protest
October 24, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Reports and Publications / 2011 / OctoberObservatory Annual Report 2011 - Steadfast in ProtestPress releaseSteadfast in ProtestThe Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenderspublishes its 2011 Annual Report 

Human rights defenders more than ever at risk

 
 
Geneva-New York-Paris, October 24, 2011.
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory)
releases today its 14th Annual Report on the situation of human rights
defenders during a press conference held at the United Nations Headquarters in
New York. 

 
Click to access the
report and Press release


 


Click here to
access the press kitWhile the revolutions that took place in
the Arab world in 2011 reminded the international community of the emergency to
put the issue of human rights back at the top of its political agenda, utmost
attention must be paid to the alerts made by human rights defenders worldwide,
and no compromise must be made towards the harassment they face.
 
The
release of the Annual Report is a key momentum of the daily activity of the
Observatory. This report tells of the struggle of human rights defenders in
about 70 countries - civil society activists, journalists, trade-unionists,
lawyers or simple citizens “indignant” at injustice, arbitrariness, or horror.
 
The
document highlights the universality of the claims raised by the “Arab Spring”.
As pointed out by Stéphane Hessel and Aung San Suu Kyi in the foreword to the
report, “everywhere, respect for human rights was at the heart of the
peoples’ claims, (…) These movements did not feed on identity, religious or
cultural politics, but were rather founded on the principles enshrined in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (…)”.
 
“At
the same time”, FIDH President Souhayr Belhassen says, “human rights
defenders are more than ever at risk. As the Report is being published, the
blood bath continues in Syria, in Libya and in Yemen. In Africa, the Middle
 East, Europe, Americas, Asia, human
rights defenders are harassed, imprisoned, sometimes tortured”.
 
For OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock, “far
from being recognised for what they are - vital protagonists for change, the
guarantors of a free society - human rights defenders are, on the contrary,
subjected daily to repression by regimes that are all the harsher for having
understood the force and the legitimacy of their claims”. “The present
report calls for stronger protection for those involved in human rights and
democracy”, he concludes.
 
The Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT),
accompanies, follows and protects human rights defenders at risk throughout the
year.
           Margaret Sekaggya, Gerald Staberock, Souhayr Belhassen, Radwan Ziadeh

 
Complete version of the annual report






The report is divided by region:






















Introduction / Methodology
North Africa / Middle East
Sub-Saharan Africa
Americas
Asia
Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
Annexes
Map


 

 


Report
is also available in French and Spanish


 
 
Press
contacts:
OMCT:         Sarah
 Petitpierre: +41 (0) 22 809 49 21
FIDH:           Arthur Manet / Karine Appy: +33(0) 1
43 55 90 19 /14 12
The FIDH
and OMCT wish to thank the European Union for making the publication of this report possible, as well as the International Organisation of the
Francophonie, the Republic and Canton of Geneva, the Norwegian Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, the Finnish Ministry for Foreign Affairs, the French Ministry
of Foreign and European Affairs,
the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA) and the Sigrid
Rausing Trust for their support. Its content is the sole responsibility of OMCT
and FIDH and should in no way be interpreted as reflecting the view(s) of the supporting
institutions. 