Algeria:  Abdelkader Kherba acquitted but defenders still judicially harassed
September 12, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Algeria / 2012 / SeptemberAlgeria: Abdelkader Kherba acquitted but defenders still judicially harassed Abdelkader Kherbad discharged while human rights defenders still harassed322 KB

ALGERIA: Abdelkader Kherba discharged… While human rights defenders
still harassed in Algeria !
Algiers,
Copenhagen, Paris, 12th September 2012 -
The Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN), the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), the Coalition of Families of the Disappeared (CFDA), the Algerian League
for Human Rights Defense (LADDH) and the National Independent Union of Public
Servants (SNAPAP) welcome discharge of Abdelkader Kherba, under arrest since
August 21 and accused of «insulting an official» by the Court of Ksar El
Bokhari (150 km south of Algiers). Our organisations however call the Algerian
authorities to bring the harassment of human rights defenders to an end. 
Mr.
Kherba, member of the National Committee for the Defence of
the Rights of the Unemployed (Comité national pour la défense des droits des
chômeurs - CNDDC) and the LADDH, was released yesterday
after three weeks in detention at the prison of Ksar El Bokhari where he
started a hunger strike to protest against his arbitrary detention. The
Prosecutor requested to impose a sentence of 1 year in jail and 20 000 dinars
fine (almost 200 Euros) despite the fact that major contradictions appeared and
had been raised by the coalition of defense attorneys, composed by members of
the LADDH and the Network of Lawyers for the Defense of Human Rights (RADDH).
Although
this trial leads to a discharge, Mr. Kherba is still waiting for the Court’s decision
concerning another case for which he has been sentenced by the Court of Sidi M’hamed
1 year suspended sentence and 20.000 dinars (200 euros) fine for “direct
incitement to a gathering” (art. 100 of the Criminal Code) after he participated in
and filmed a sit-in organised within the framework of a social protest movement
of clerks regarding working conditions in the judiciary. His
appeal hearing is scheduled for September 16. 
Besides,
the first hearing of the trial against Yacine Zaid, trade unionist and
president of the Laghouat section of the LADDH, Abdou Bendjoudi, one of
the leaders of the Independent Youth Movement for Change (MJIC), Athman
Aouameur, a member of the Defense of Freedom and Dignity Network (RDLD) and
Lakhdar Bouziani, member of the National Autonomous Union of Public
Administration Staff (SNAPAP), will take place on September 25 before the Court
of Bab El Oued (Algiers). The facts for which they are charged occurred on
April 26, 2012, when they had held a peaceful sit-in in front the Court of Sidi
M'hamed to denounce the judicial harassment suffered by Abdelkader Kherba. They
are charged for "inciting unarmed gathering" and face up to a
year in prison and 5 000 DZD fine (almost 50 Euros). 
Our
organisations several times expressed their deep concern over the
intensification of arbitrary judicial proceedings against human rights
defenders in Algeria as being a violation of fundamental rights. Furthermore,
this harassment has the effect of interfering with the work of activists who
have to devote time to the preparation of their defense.
Our
organisations call on the Algerian authorities to act urgently to :
·      
Ensure in all circumstances the
physical and psychological integrity of Yacine Zaid, Abdelkader Kherba, Abdou
Bendjoudi, Athmane Aouameur and Lakhdar Bouzini as well as all Algerian
activists and human rights defenders;
 
·      
End all forms of harassment,
including judicial harassment, against Yacine Zaid, Abdelkader Kherba, Abdou
Bendjoudi, Athmane Aouameur and Lakhdar Bouzini as well as all Algerian
activists and human rights defenders, so they can conduct their peaceful
activities without any obstacle;
·     
Ensure freedom of expression and
demonstration for all human rights defenders in Algeria who claim their rights
peacefully, as enshrined in articles 33 and 41 of the Algerian Constitution and
in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, ratified by
Algeria.
 
Finally, our organisations
recall the Algerian authorities’ obligation to comply, in all circumstances,
with the international and regional instruments for the protection of human
rights as well as with the provisions of the UN Declaration on human rights
defenders, which states that "everyone has the right, individually and
in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels" (art. 1) and that " the State shall take all
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence,
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise
of the rights referred to in the present Declaration
" (art. 12.2).  
 
For
more information, please contact :
·       REMDH : Hayet Zeghiche : +32 2 503 06 86  
·      
FIDH : Arthur Manet : +33 1 43 55 25 18
·      
OMCT : Isabelle Scherer : +41 22 809 49 39
·      
CFDA : +33 143 44 87 82 
·      
LADDH : +213 21 23 80 86 
·      
SNAPAP : +213 21 52 03 72 