Azerbaijan:  Suspension of sentences of Leyla and Arif Yunus is a welcome step, but justice is still elusive
December 10, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2015 / DecemberAzerbaijan: Suspension of sentences of Leyla and Arif Yunus is a welcome step, but justice is still elusive

We -- members of the Civic Solidarity
Platform and the Sports For Rights Campaign -- were relieved to learn that one
of Azerbaijan’s most well-known political prisoners, Leyla Yunus, was released
from detention yesterday and that that the Baku City Court of Appeal changed
her sentence and that of her husband Arif into suspended sentences of 5 years,
on probation. However, most of the charges against the couple have not
been dropped and, while on probation, Leyla and Arif Yunus will not be able to
leave the country. We remain seriously concerned about the state of health of
Leyla Yunus, who has been diagnosed with diabetes and hepatitis C, and that of
Arif Yunus, who suffers from high blood pressure. There are doubts that
adequate medical assistance can be provided to Leyla Yunus in Azerbaijan.
 
As part of the ongoing civil society
crackdown in Azerbaijan, Leyla and her husband Arif were
arrested in late July and early August 2014, respectively. On 13 August 2015,
they were convicted on charges of large‑scale fraud and tax evasion. Leyla was
sentenced to 8.5 years in prison and Arif to 7 years. While in detention, they
were humiliated by police officers, put in overcrowded cells, beaten several
times and deprived of much needed medical treatment. On 13 November 2015,  Arif Yunus was released under house arrest on health grounds. When ruling to change
the sentences, the court of appeal dropped the charges of forgery, but retained
others. The court also lifted the order to seize the house owned by the couple.
 
We, members of the Civic Solidarity
Platform and the Sports for Rights Campaign, consider the new developments in
the case of Arif and Leyla Yunus to be positive and a first step in the right
direction. However, we continue to call for all charges against the couple to
be dropped. Leyla Yunus requires an urgent medical examination and she should
be granted the right to receive medical treatment abroad if necessary. Arif
Yunus must also be provided with swift and adequate medical assistance.
 
Leyla and Arif Yunus are not the only
political prisoners in Azerbaijan. Dozens of other civil society activists,
human rights lawyers and journalists remain in detention or prison in
Azerbaijan solely due to their professional activities and the peaceful
and legitimate exercise of their fundamental rights and freedoms. They should
be immediately and unconditionally released. The Azerbaijani government must
respect its commitments before its own people, as well as its obligations under
international human rights law.   
 
Signed by:
Analytical Center for Interethnic
Cooperation and Consultations
Article 19
Association UMDPL
Bulgarian Helsinki Committee
Baris Zvozkau Belarusian Human Rights
House
Center for Civil liberties
Center for the Development of Democracy
and Human Rights
Crude Accountability
Freedom Files
Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in
Serbia
Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights
Human Rights House Foundation
Human Rights Monitoring Institute
Human Rights Movement “Bir
Duino-Kyrgyzstan”
Index on Censorship
International Federation for Human
Rights (FIDH), within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders
International Partnership for Human
Rights
Kazakhstan International Bureau for
Human Rights and Rule of Law
Kosova Rehabilitation Centre for
Torture Victims 
KRF Public Alternative
Legal Transformation Center
Moscow Helsinki Group
Netherlands Helsinki Committee
Norwegian Helsinki Committee
Nota Bene
Promo LEX
Public Verdict Foundation
SOVA Center for Information and Analyses
Sports For Rights
Swiss Helsinki Committee
World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders 