Sudan:  Sudan: arrests and incommunicado detention of a student and a teacher
May  2, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2003 / MaySudan: Sudan: arrests and incommunicado detention of a student and a teacherCase SDN 031202.3 Follow-up of Case SDN 031202 Arbitrary detention / Incommunicado detention / Risk of torture / Release  Geneva, May 2nd, 2003  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information regarding the following situation in Sudan.  New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudanese Organisation against Torture, a member of the OMCT network, of the arrests and incommunicado detention another student and a teacher in Khartoum.   According to the information received, on April 9th, 2003, the National Security Agency arrested Parthel Maus and Molawal Gidboat, both of whom are third year law students at Al Nilein University, Khartoum. Mr. Gidboat was released later the same day, but Mr. Maus’ whereabouts remain unknown. Both students are from Southern Sudan, and are members of the African National Front (ANF), a southern Sudanese student movement. They have reportedly been involved in the organisation of and campaigning surrounding the recent Student Union elections at the university.    According to reports, on April 24th, 2003, Lenin Altayeb Yousif, a teacher at the Sudan Private School in Al Khalakla Al Guba, Khartoum, was also arrested by the National Security Agency. Mr. Yousif was taken to an undisclosed location, but unconfirmed reports indicate that he may be at the National Security Agency building located next to Faroq cemetery. Mr. Yousif's family has been unable to obtain information regarding his whereabouts and condition. Mr. Yousif reportedly suffers from asthma requiring regular medication and there are serious concerns for his health, as his family has confirmed that he was not carrying his medication at the time of his arrest.  Mr. Yousif is a former student leader at Al Nilein University in Khartoum and a well-known member of the Sudanese Students Democratic Front (SSDF).  He has reportedly been arrested on three previous occasions and been tortured during a prior detention.  Three of Mr. Yousif's brothers, Al Shafe'e Altayeb Yousif (teacher), Khidir Altayeb Yousif (engineering student), and Hashim Altayeb Yousif (math student) were arrested on Novermber 29th, 2002.  Security forces reportedly informed the family that the men would be held in detention until Lenin Altayeb Yousif gave himself up. Khidir Altayeb Yousif and Hashim Altayeb Yousif were subsequently released, but Al Shafe'e Altayeb Yousif remains imprisoned. Khidir Altayeb Yousif and Hashim Altayeb Yousif alleged that they and the other detainees were tortured during their detention. Atif Alsoni, Mohamed Awad Abdalla, Ahmed Makoy, and Mawya Yagoub are four other students who remain in detention (see previous case and follow-ups for additional information).  OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Parthel Maus, Lenin Altayeb Yousif, Al Shafe'e Altayeb Yousif and the other student detainees being held in relation with these events. OMCT calls on the Sudanese Government to disclose the whereabouts of Mr. Parthel Maus and Mr. Lenin Altayeb Yousif and to allow them to receive family visits and access to legal counsel, as well as to guarantee the personal integrity of the detainees at all times. OMCT calls for the immediate release of all the afore-mentioned detainees unless there are valid legal charges against them, which are in line with international law, and, if such charges exist, for them to be promptly brought before an independent and competent tribunal and for their procedural rights to be guaranteed at all times.   Background information   In Sudan, students are one of the groups that face the greatest risk of arbitrary arrest, ill-treatment and/or torture during detention. There have been a worrying number of arbitrary arrests and restrictions on the freedoms of expression and association throughout the past year, with the harshest actions taken in May 2002, and October/November 2002. Both crackdowns followed demonstrations commemorating significant historical events. In May, twenty-five students and members of the ANF were arrested and charged with offences including "war against the state", sedition, breaching public peace, and causing injury. Members of the SSDF and members of the ANF have been specifically targeted by these repressive actions. In January 2002, Acts of Student Codes of Conduct were introduced to prevent students from taking part in political activities. These Acts have provided grounds for student suspension and dismissal. Meetings, demonstrations and other student political or social activities are broken up by security forces, and the Khartoum University Students Union (KUSU), a major student union, was suspended and banned four years ago when persons linked with the political opposition appeared poised to win campus elections.  Action requested:  Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:  i.	immediately locate the whereabouts of Parthel Maus and Lenin Altayeb Yousif; ii.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Parthel Maus, Lenin Altayeb Yousif, Al Shafe'e Altayeb Yousif and all of the other afore-mentioned student detainees; iii.	guarantee that they are granted access to legal representation and family visits; iv.	order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; v.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these events, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; vi.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with international human rights standards.  Addresses:  ·	His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan,  President's Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan.  Fax: + 24911 783223 ·	Mr. Ali Mohamed Osman Yassin, Minister of Justice and Attorney General, Ministry of Justice Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: +24911 788941  ·	Mr. Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan.  Fax:  +24911 779383  ·	Mr. Yasir Sid Ahmed, Advisory Council for Human Rights, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan.  Fax: + 24911 779173 ·	His Excellency Ambassador Mr Ibrahim Mirghani Ibrahim, Permanent Mission of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 335, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 7312656.  E-mail: mission.sudan@ties.itu.int  Please also write to the embassies of Sudan in your respective country. Geneva, May 2nd, 2003 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 