Indonesia:  Indonesia: a former child soldier arbitrarily executed
September  3, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / Indonesia / 2002 / SeptemberIndonesia: Indonesia: a former child soldier arbitrarily executedCase IDN 030902.CC CHILD CONCERN Summary execution  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Indonesia.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source of information that Andika Putra, a 16 year-old homeless child was shot to death by members of the Indonesian military forces on 19 August 2002 at 7.40 pm in Lhokseumawe North Aceh.  According to the information received, the child, who was used as a child soldier by the Indonesian armed forces in their operations in the region of Lhokseumawe, had escaped to Banda Aceh on 12 August 2002 and was looking for humanitarian organisations in order to get support. Two days later, he decided to come back to Lhokseumawe North Aceh.   On 19 August 2002, fives persons on motor bikes were allegedly seen departing from the Kuta Kareung road to the public graves of Cunda, Muara Dua sub district, North Aceh district. Then, villagers heard the sound of four gun shots and saw the five persons coming back from the graves of Cunda. They came to the site and discovered a dead child, whose hands had been tied up to his back.  According to an investigation carried out by Kontras Aceh, the child was identified as Andika Putra, also known as Anak Seribu Pulau (thousand islands boy), a homeless child, from Sp. IV Sp. Keuramat, Dewantara sub district - North Aceh.  The boy had received two bullets in his head, one in his cheek and one in his chest. It has been established that the weapon which had been used belonged to the Brimob (the mobile brigade of the semi military Indonesian police), regiment III, located in GOR Uteunkot Cunda, Muara dua subdistrict. Three of the perpetrators were identified as Romi and Maskur, two members of the Brimob, and Zulfikar, a civilian recruited by the Brimob to be spy.  According to the information received, this is not the only case happening in the area. On 29 July 2002, two youths had already been killed by the same armed forces.   The International Secretariat of OMCT is deeply concerned about the killing of Andika Putra. OMCT deems that this incident constitutes a violation of article 6 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, which enshrines the child’s right to life.   Action requested  Please write to the authorities of Indonesia urging them to:  i.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of the death of Andika Putra, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; ii.	guarantee adequate, compensation and rehabilitation to the family of the victim; iii.	elaborate and implement preventive programmes, in particular by ensuring education and training to police and military members. This should include specific training in child psychology, child welfare and international standards and norms of human rights and children’s rights; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards, especially the Convention on the Rights of the Child.  Addresses   ·	Madame Hj. Megawati, Présidente de la République d'Indonésie, Soekarnoputri    (PDI-P), Istana Merdeka Jakarta 10110 ·	Monsieur H. Hamzah Haz   (PPP), Vice-Président, Jl. Medan Merdeka Selatan, no 6, Jakarta 10110 ·	Lt.Gén. (ret.) Hari Sabarno, Ministre de l'Intérieur et de l'autonomie régionale, Jl. Medan Merdeka Utara No 7, Jakarta Pusat 10110, Fax 381 12 21 ·	Matori Abdul Djalil	(PKB), Ministre de la Défense, Jl. Medan Merdeka Barat 13-14 ·	Jakarta 10110 ·	Yusril Ihza Mahendra, Ministre de la Justice et des droits de l'homme (PBP), Jl. HR. Rasuna Said Kav. 4-5, Jakarta Selatan ·	General Endriartono Sutarto, Commander of the Armed Forces, Panglima TNI,  ·	Markas Besar TNI, Jl. Medan Merdeka Barat No 13, Jakarta Pusat, Indonesia, ·	Fax: + 62 21 4584 6165 /+ 62 21 520 1636 ·	Gen. D'ai Bachtiar, National Police Chief, Kapolri Markas Besar Kepolisian RI, Jl. Trunojoyo 3, Kebayoran Baru, Jakarta Selatan, Indonesia ·	Fax:	+ 62 21 7201402 ·	Lt Gen (rtd) Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, Coordinating Minister For Politics And Security, Menteri Koordinator Bidang Politik dan Keamanan, Jl. Medan Merdeka Barat No. 15, Jakarta Pusat 10110	, Indonesia, Fax:+ 62 21 345 0918/344 1751  Please also write to the embassies of Indonesia in your respective country.  Geneva, September 3d, 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 