Israel:  Shrinking space for civil society in Israel : Open Letter to Federica Mogherini
June 20, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2016 / JuneIsrael: Shrinking space for civil society in Israel : Open Letter to Federica MogheriniJoint NGO letter on shrinking space for civil society in Israel_ HR Mogherini2 pages / 542 KB​To : High Representative MogheriniCC: Mr. Lambrinidis, EU Special Representative for Human Rights.
Dear High Representative/Vice-President Mogherini,
We write to you as a family of European civil society, cooperation, 
and human rights organisations who work closely with Israeli and 
Palestinian civil society organisations. Together, we represent a large 
number of constituencies across countries that work to promote respect 
for human rights and sustainable and just peace.
On the occasion of the visit of Israeli President, Mr. Reuven Rivlin 
to Brussels, we would like to express our deep concern over recent 
campaigns against civil society organisations in Israel which limit 
space for free speech, delegitimise human rights defenders and hinder 
the search for a peaceful resolution to the conflict.
We would like to bring to your attention that 22 Israeli human rights
 organisation asked Mr. Rivlin to intervene in favour of Israeli 
democracy, and to act to protect free space for civil society 
organisations to work. Kindly read below the English translation of the 
letter, dated 15 June 2016.
Against this backdrop, we urge you to raise your concerns before 
Israeli President Rivlin, in particular on the legislation of the 
so-called NGO Bill and the shrinking space for civil society. We hope 
that you call on him to assume a leading role in protecting and 
cultivating an environment in which a vibrant and independent civil 
society can continue to promote human rights, justice, and peace.
Yours sincerely,
Floris Faber, Director, ACT Alliance EU
Bernd Nilles, Secretary General, CIDSE
Michel Tubiana, President, EuroMed Rights
Karim Lahidji, President, FIDH, within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
Gerald Staberock, Secretary General, OMCT, within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
Natalia Alonso, Deputy Director of Advocacy & Campaigns, Oxfam International
Mary Lawlor, Executive Director, Front Line Defenders
***
To: Mr. Reuven Rivlin, President of the State of Israel
Dear Mr. President,
 Re: Stopping Anti-Democratic Legislation and Initiatives 
We, the directors of organizations for human rights and social 
change, are turning to you to request that you act to stop the wave of 
anti-democratic legislation in Israel and intervene in order to put an 
end to the systematic harm inflicted upon the work of social justice 
activists who defend human rights.
In recent years, there has been a dangerous and troubling erosion of 
Israeli democracy on all fronts. We, organizations working for social 
change and civil and human rights, have been under a fervent onslaught 
that not only harms us, but also Israel as a democracy.
This onslaught manifests itself in anti-democratic legislation aimed 
at silencing critical voices, limiting freedom of expression, 
diminishing the rights of minorities, and weakening the status of the 
Supreme Court. Legislative initiatives like the NGO Bill, that, first 
and foremost, harms human rights, peace, and left-wing organizations and
 the Suspension Bill that is designed to intimidate and alienate public 
officials who represent the Arab minority among others, are fervently 
advanced in the Knesset. No one disputes the fact that they are 
explicitly anti-democratic.
These initiatives are taking place in a hostile atmosphere of 
incitement and political persecution against human rights and social 
change organizations. Senior politicians allow themselves to label 
members of Breaking the Silence “spies,” “traitors” and “foreign 
agents”; Right-wing organizations use public funds to pay impostors to 
infiltrate organizations as “moles” with the aim of defaming them; and 
there is even a concerted effort to shut down Breaking the Silence 
through legal measures.
In parallel, we are witnessing selective law enforcement sends young 
Israeli Arabs to jail for comments they posted on social media outlets, 
in blatant violation of freedom of expression; while administrative 
detention continues to be used as a legitimate tool against Palestinians
 and Israelis alike.
This reality, in which it is legitimate to label and slander 
individuals and groups – including the Israeli President, the IDF Chief 
of Staff, the Defence Minister, MKs, artists, academics, intellectuals, 
and others, as dissidents against the State – solely for their moral, 
social, and political positions, is unacceptable and must be stopped.
It is clear to all that the common ground shared by these initiatives
 is the desire to narrow the impact of organizations that do not align 
with the government, both in Israel and abroad. This is due, among other
 things, to the fact that they advocate for human rights in the OPT, 
oppose the occupation, and work to ensure rights for asylum seekers. The
 success of such persecution will come at a heavy price: the weakening 
of Israel and grave harm to its democratic nature.
The work of human rights and civil society organizations in Israel is
 essential to its democracy, especially when it comes to organizations 
that directly oppose government policy. Without legal and political 
protection that creates space for safe and free action in Israel, we 
will be barred from fulfilling our civil duty to identify injustices and
 work to correct them.
Thus, we, organizations for human rights and social change in Israel,
 call on you, the President of the State of Israel, who holds democracy 
dear, and knows personally the pain of incitement and hateful attacks, 
to make every possible effort to stop the anti-democratic wave engulfing
 us; to stop the persecution of civil society organizations and prevent 
further violations of the freedom of association, the freedom of 
expression, and other Israeli democratic values. Only a country that 
provides legal and political recognition of human and civil rights, and 
freedom of expression, which embodies the simple and just principles of 
equal rights and human dignity, is deserving of being called a 
democracy.
Sincerely,
Sharon Abraham Weiss – Association for Civil Rights in Israel,
Hagai El-Ad – B’Tselem, 
Yudith Oppenheimer – Ir Amim, Arik
Ascherman – Rabbis for Human Rights, 
Avi Buskila – Peace Now, 
Alma Biblash – Human Rights Defenders Fund, 
Ran Goldstein – Physicians for Human Rights, 
Yonatan Gher – Amnesty International - Israel, 
Rawnak Natour and Ron Gerlitz – Sikkuy, 
Tania Hary – Gisha - Legal Center for Freedom of Movement, 
Ala Khatib – Kav LaOved, 
Lior Yavne – Akevot - Institute for Israeli-Palestinian Conflict Research, 
Raya Yaron – MachsomWatch, 
Nirit Moskovich – The Social Guard, 
Reut Michaeli – Hotline for Refugees and Migrants, 
Yuli Novak – Breaking the Silence, 
Reem Amer and Maayan Dak – Coalition of Women for Peace,
Neta Patrick – Yesh Din, 
Michael Pinchuk – Assaf, 
Dalia Kerstein – Hamoked Center for the Defence of the Individual, 
Hedva Radovanitz – Bimkom - Planners for Planning Rights, 
Rachel Stroumsa – The Public Committee Against Torture in Israel. 