Congo, Democratic Republic:  'D.R. Congo
August 17, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Congo, Democratic Republic / 2001 / AugustCongo, Democratic Republic: 'D.R. CongoCase COD 111000  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Democratic Republic of Congo.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of the OMCT is gravely concerned by information received from a reliable source regarding an attack on a catholic parish church of Mubumbano of the archdiocese of Bukavu and a convent of sisters during the night of 2nd and 3rd October 2000 carried out by a group of about a hundred soldiers from the Rwandan patriotic army, well-dressed and heavily armed.  According to the information received, at around 22:30, a group of Rwandan soldiers arrived at the parish where they tied up the priests and brutally beat them, before calmly beginning their pillaging.  They then proceeded to the convent.  It was only at about 2:30 am that the inhabitants of the village raised the alarm.  At this point the soldiers decided to end their activities and left after pillaging and causing destruction to the parish and the convent.  It is noted that, in spite of the presence of military camps in the area, the soldiers carried out the attack with impunity and those from the nearby military camps only presented themselves the next day.  This is the 38th attack on a Parish or Health Centre since the beginning of the war in August 1998.  Since March 2000, the attacks have increased.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Democratic Republic of Congo urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the inhabitants this area; ii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into these events and all allegations of torture, identify those responsible and apply appropriate sanctions; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with international human rights standards.  Addresses  Me Joseph Mudumbi, Chef du Département de l'Administration du territoire du R.C.D. Goma - République Démocratique du Congo, N  télécopie : 00 871 761 850 629 ou  632.  Me Jean-Marie Emungu Ehumba, Chef du Département de la Justice, Réformes institutionnelles et Droits humains du R.C.D. Goma - République Démocratique du Congo N  télécopie : Idem.  Please also notify :  The President Laurent-Désiré Kabila. Présidence de la République, Kinshasa-Ngaliema, République Démocratique du Congo. Fax (+ 243) 880 02 120   Mr Mwenze Kongolo, Minister of  Justice, Ministère de la Justice, BP 3137, Kinshasa Gombé, République Démocratique du Congo.   Mr Gaetan Kakudji, Minister of the Intérieur, Ministère de l'Intérieur, Hôtel du Conseil exécutif, Kinshasa - Gombé, République Démocratique du Congo.  Geneva, October 11, 2000 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 