India:  Judicial harassment against Messrs. Hiren Gohain, Akhil Gogoi and Manjit Mahanta
January 15, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / India / 2019 / JanuaryIndia: Judicial harassment against Messrs. Hiren Gohain, Akhil Gogoi and Manjit Mahanta​IND 001 / 0119 / OBS 004Judicial harassment
India
January 15, 2019
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent intervention in the
following situation in India.
 
Brief
description of the information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by
reliable sources about the judicial harassment against Messrs. Hiren Gohain, Akhil Gogoi and Manjit Mahanta,
in relation to their participation in a peaceful protest against the Citizenship
(Amendment) Bill in Guwahati, Assam State, to oppose the discriminatory
character of the proposed legislation.
 
According to the information received, on January 9, 2019, Latasil police registered
a case against Messrs. Hiren Gohain, one of
Assam's most prominent scholar and intellectual, Akhil Gogoi, President of the Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti
(KMSS)[1], and Manjit Mahanta, Convenor of the
Forum against Citizenship Act Amendment Bill, under Sections 120(B)
(“punishment of criminal conspiracy”), 121 (“waging
or attempting to wage war, or abetting waging of war, against the Government”),
123 (“concealing with intent to facilitate
design to wage war”), and 124(A) (“sedition”) of the Indian Penal Code.
 
On January 11, 2019, the Gauhati High Court granted bail to Mr.
Manjit Mahanta and interim bail to Messrs.
Hiren Gohain and Akhil Gogoi against a surety of
Rs. 5,000 each (around 61,5 Euros), and fixed January 22, 2019 as the next date
of hearing of the case.
 
The case was filed after Messrs. Hiren Gohain, Akhil Gogoi and Manjit
Mahanta attended a public rally organized by the Forum against Citizenship Act
Amendment Bill in Latasil, Guwahati, on January 7, 2019, during which they
expressed their views against the religion-based
Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2016 and strongly opposed the passing of
this piece of legislation[2]. Despite their opposition to the Bill, the three
human rights defenders have publicly stated that they are not against
the Constitution of India, and are solely asking for equal constitutional
protection for the people of Assam State.
 
The
Observatory recalls also that in 2017 Mr. Akhil Gogoi had already been charged with sedition for expressing his criticisms
against the policies of the Government of Assam State as well as the
Citizenship (Amendment) Bill[3]. 
 
The Observatory condemns the judicial
harassment of Messrs. Hiren
Gohain, Akhil Gogoi and Manjit Mahanta, which seem aimed at hindering their peaceful and
legitimate human rights activities, and urges
Indian authorities to put an end to all acts of harassment against them,
including at the judicial level.
 
Actions requested: 
 
Please write to the authorities in India,
urging them to:
 
i. Guarantee, in all circumstances, the
physical integrity and psychological well-being of Messrs. Hiren Gohain, Akhil Gogoi and Manjit
Mahanta and of all human rights
defenders in India;
 
ii. Put an end to all acts of harassment -
including at the judicial level - against Messrs. Hiren Gohain, Akhil Gogoi and Manjit
Mahanta and all human rights
defenders in India, and ensure that they are able to carry out their legitimate
activities without any hindrance and fear of reprisals in all circumstances;
 
iii. Conform to the provisions of the UN
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the
United Nations on December 9, 1998, in particular with Articles 1 and 12.2;
 
iv. Ensure in all circumstances respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international
human rights standards and international instruments ratified by India.
 
Addresses: 
 
·    
Mr. Shri
Narendra Damodardas Modi, Prime Minister of India, Fax: + 91 11 2301 6857.
E-mail: pmosb@pmo.nic.in / manmo@sansad.in
·    
Mr. Raj
Nath Singh, Union Minister of Home Affairs of India, Fax: +91 11 2309 2979.
Email: dirfcra-mha@gov.in
·    
Mr. Rajiv Gauba, Secretary, Ministry of
Home Affairs of India, Email: hshso@nic.in
·    
Justice Dipak
Misra,
Chief Justice of India, Supreme Court, of India, Fax: +91 11 233 83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.in
·    
Justice Shri H.L. Dattu,
Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission of India, Fax +91 11 2465
1329. Email: chairnhrc@nic.in
·    
Mr. Khaleel Ahmad, Focal Point on Human
Rights Defenders, National Human Rights Commission of India, Email: hrd-nhrc@nic.in
·    
H.E. Mr. Rajiv Kumar Chander, Ambassador,
Permanent Mission of India to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax:
+41 22 906 86 96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
·    
H.E. Mr.
Manjeev Singh Puri, Embassy of India to the European Union, Belgium and
Luxembourg in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 6489638 / +32 2 6451869
 
Please also
write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of India located in your country.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, January
15, 2019
 
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The
objective of this programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression
against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the
European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international
civil society.




[1] Founded by
Mr. Akhil Gogoi in 2005, KMSS works
notably in favour of land rights and since 2009 has also been leading a statewide movement against construction of big dams
in the ecologically sensitive regions of Assam State and Arunachal Pradesh
State.


[2] Amidst and ahead of the
passing of the Citizenship Amendment Bill at the Lok Sabha (the Lower House of
India’s Parliament) on January 8, 2019, there was widespread protest throughout
the North Eastern states of India against the said Bill, which seeks to grant citizenship to Hindus, Sikhs,
Buddhists, Jains, Parsis and Christians from Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan
who had entered the State by December 31, 2014 and if they have lived in India
for six years. Not only does it violate Article 14 of the Constitution that
guarantees right to equality, but it also contradicts the citizenship cut-off
date of March 24, 1971 that was decided in the Assam Accord. This also implies that illegal
migrants who are Muslims or atheists will not be eligible for a citizenship.
People in Assam are
against this differential treatment to illegal migrants on the basis of their
religion. The Assamese also fear that the Bill will make them a minority in
their own homeland.


[3] See
Observatory Urgent Appeal IND 005 / 0917 / OBS 106, published on September 29,
2017. 