Bahrain:  UN Member and Observer States should call on Bahraini authorities to free human rights defender Nabeel Rajab
June 13, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2017 / JuneBahrain: UN Member and Observer States should call on Bahraini authorities to free human rights defender Nabeel Rajab 





Excellencies,
 
We, the undersigned,
express our deep concern over the continued detention of prominent Bahraini
human rights defender Nabeel Rajab, on the first anniversary of his arrest. We
urge you to call for his immediate release and for all charges against him to be
dropped. 
 
Nabeel Rajab was
arrested on 13 June 2016. He remains detained despite a court order to release
him on 28 December 2016. He faces three separate legal cases, the trials for
two of which have been postponed 23 times. In all cases, Rajab is being
prosecuted for exercising his right to freedom of expression and faces up to a
total of 18 years behind bars. 
 
Rajab is the
President of the Bahrain Center for Human Rights, Founding Director of the Gulf
Centre for Human Rights, Deputy Secretary General of FIDH and a member of Human
Rights Watch’s Middle East Division advisory committee. Rajab has repeatedly
spoken out about human rights violations in Bahrain, resulting in him being in
and out of prison since 2012. In one of the three cases against him, in which
he faces up to 15 years in prison, Rajab was charged in relation to his social
media posts with: “insulting a statutory body”; “spreading rumours in war
time”; and “insulting a neighbouring country.” In another of the three cases,
Rajab faces up to three years in prison on charges of “spreading false news”,
in relation to interviews given to the media. In September 2016, he was charged
again with “spreading false news” after the New York Times published a
letter in his name.
 
Rajab has spent nine
and a half of the past twelve months in solitary confinement. In May 2017, the
UN Committee Against Torture identified Rajab’s case of concern, and called for
his release, as well as all human rights defenders and journalists detained and
imprisoned for their work in Bahrain.[1]
 
We are particularly
concerned about Rajab’s health, which continues to deteriorate due to poor
conditions and mistreatment. On Wednesday, 5 April 2017, Rajab underwent major
surgery at a military hospital. Against medical advice, he was returned to his
cell at East Riffa Police Station two days later. The following day he was
rushed to the police clinic for emergency treatment. On 7 June, he underwent
minor surgery. Rajab’s health prevents him from attending his court hearings.
The presiding judge has refused all requests submitted by his lawyers to
release him on bail, despite the length of his detention period in solitary
confinement and clear evidence about the deteriorating condition of his health.
 
Urgent international
pressure for Nabeel Rajab’s release is needed. We urge your delegations to call
on Bahrain to end the unlawful detainment of Nabeel Rajab and to release him
immediately and unconditionally. As Adam Rajab, Nabeel Rajab’s son notes:
“without international pressure we will not see him walk out of prison anytime
soon.” 
 
Please accept, Excellencies,
the assurances of our highest consideration,
 
Signed,
Americans for Democracy and Human Rights in Bahrain
Amnesty International
ARTICLE 19
Bahrain Centre for Human Rights
Bahrain Institute for Rights and Democracy
CIVICUS
English PEN
European Centre for Democracy and Human Rights
FIDH, within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders
Gulf Centre for Human Rights
IFEX
Index on Censorship
PEN International
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders




[1] Committee against torture, Concluding observations on the second and
third periodic reports of Bahrain, adopted by the Committee at its sixtieth
session (18 April to 12 May 2017), http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/Treaties/CAT/Shared%20Documents/BHR/INT_CAT_COC_BHR_27465_E.pdf 