Malawi:  Threats and reprisals against members of human rights organisations
March 24, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Malawi / 2011 / MarchMalawi: Threats and reprisals against members of human rights organisationsThreats and reprisals4 pages / 120 KB

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

MWI 001 / 0311 / OBS 045
Threats /
Reprisals following
communication with an international body 
Malawi
March 24, 2011
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Malawi.
Description of the situation:
The Observatory was informed by reliable sources of
the condemnation (see below) by the President of the Republic of Malawi of
communications made by Malawian human rights organisations, including the
Centre for Human Rights and Rehabilitation (CHRR), to the United Nations (UN)
Human Rights Council and to the UN Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders, as well as
of the subsequent death threats received by Mr. Undule
Mwakasungula, Executive Director of the CHRR and Chair of the Human Rights
Consultative Committee (HRCC), a coalition of more than 90 organisations.
According to the information
received, on March 9, 2011, the Civil Society Grand Coalition for the Defense
of Democracy and Good Governance, a coalition of Malawi human rights
organisations, which includes the Centre for Development of
people (CEDEP) and the CHRR, presented a petition to the UN Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders. The petition was asking
her to investigate the imminent dangers faced by human rights defenders in
Malawi, and to advise the UN to condemn the Malawian government and to inform
the International Criminal Court of human rights violations in the country. 
On March 16, 2011, Mr. Levi Mvula, Programme
Manager of the CHRR, and Mr. Gift Trapence, Executive Director of the
CEDEP, made a statement on the issues of governance and human rights abuses in
Malawi at the 16th session of the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva,
Switzerland. 
Following the statement, the President of the Republic
of Malawi, Mr. Bingu wa Mutharika, allegedly expressed his disapproval
regarding those communications to UN human rights mechanisms. On March 18,
2011, as he was commissioning a confectionery factory in
Limbe, Blantyre, he allegedly stated that a group of
fifteen people was “roaming” in Europe, claiming that there are violations of
human rights in Malawi. He allegedly said that he was waiting for those people
to come back to Malawi and to present their agenda. On March 20, 2011, at a
political meeting held in Mangochi, the President reportedly expressed that
non-governmental organisations were working against national interest by
informing the international community on rights abuses in Malawi. The President also singled out Mr. Undule Mwakasungula
as leading the civil society in telling lies to donors on human rights and
governance in Malawi.
According to the information received, the same day,
on March 20, 2011, Mr. Undule Mwakasungula received two phone calls from
unknown individuals. In the first call, he was allegedly accused of tarnishing
the government’s image and undermining the good work of the President, and
warned that the ruling party and government would “deal with him at all cost”.
In the second call, the unknown interlocutor warned him that he would be
“slaughtered” if he was not careful, and accused him of carrying out his work
to dismiss a potential candidate at the next presidential elections. He further
accused him of misinforming the donors on human rights and governance situation
in Malawi. Mr. Mwakasungula has filed a complaint at the police station but
no-one has been arrested yet.
The Observatory expresses its deepest concern
regarding the acts of harassment faced by Mr. Undule Mwakasungula and the
stigmatisation of the work of human rights organisations of Malawi, as they
seem to merely aim at sanctioning their human rights activities.
The Observatory further condemns the alleged
statements made by the Malawian President against human rights NGOs
communicating with international human rights bodies.
The Observatory recalls that such statements are in violation of article
5(c) of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General
Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, which states that “For the
purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms,
everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, at the
national and international levels to communicate with non-governmental or
intergovernmental organisations.”
The Observatory further recalls the Resolution 12/2 on cooperation with
the United Nations, its representatives and mechanisms in the field of human
rights, adopted by the Human Rights Council on October 12, 2009. Its article 1
urges “Governments to prevent and refrain from all acts of intimidation
or reprisal against those who (a) Seek to cooperate or have cooperated with the
United Nations, its representatives and mechanisms in the field of human
rights, or who have provided testimony or information to them; (…) (c) Submit
or have submitted communications under procedures established by human rights
instruments, and all those who have provided legal or other assistance to them
for this purpose”.
Background information:
On February 14, 2011,
Malawi Police and Lilongwe City Assembly stopped human rights NGOs and civil
society organisations from holding a peaceful march in Lilongwe City on the 2
year-long escalating fuel crisis and deterioration of good governance in
Malawi, in spite of prior demand to obtain the authorisation of assembly from
the Lilongwe City Assembly, more than 48 hours in advance, as required by the
Police Services Act amended in 2010. The authorities stated that the purpose of
the assembly was not valid.
On
February 23, 2011, the President of Malawi invited some civil society
organisations leaders to his State residence to warn them that he would
mobilise his political party members to stop any civil society demonstrations
aimed at any dissenting views from him or his government.
Following this incident, human rights
defenders, including Mr. Undule Mwakasungula, reported that they have been
receiving threats, including anonymous phone calls and text messages asking the
location of their offices and homes.
In
addition, the HRCC received a letter dated March 2, 2011, signed by the
National Youth Forum threatening to close down their offices and its
leadership.
On March 3, 2011, four unknown
individuals driving a saloon car, equipped with knives and gallons of petrol,
broke into CHRR offices and demanded that the guard takes them to Mr.
Mwakasungula’s home. The guard was reportedly beaten and abandoned away of the
office after he told them wrong directions to Mr. Mwakasungula house. 
On March 6, 2011 the President of
Malawi held a public mass rally for the Democratic Progressive Party in
Blantyre, broadcasted on the national television and radio, during which he
allegedly told his party supporters to fight and crush all those who were
opposing his views or criticising the Malawi government on issues of human
rights, democracy and governance. 
On
March 7 , 2011, senior party officials from the ruling Democratic
Progressive Party held a press conference where they reportedly
defended the President's instructions to attack everyone with dissenting views.
During the press conference, the officials stated that the President statement
did not mean that his critics should be attacked from dissent. 
Actions requested:
The Observatory urges the authorities of Malawi to:
i.             
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
of Mr. Undule Mwakasungula
and of all human rights defenders in Malawi;
ii.            
Refrain from
stigmatising and discrediting the peaceful and
legitimate activities of human rights defenders and ensure that they can work in
a safe environment without fear of being prosecuted for criticising Government
policy or Government officials.
iii.           
Order an immediate, thorough, effective and impartial investigation into
the threats against Mr. Undule Mwakasungula, the result of which must be made public, in order to identify all those
responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and
apply to them the penal sanctions provided by the law;
iv.          
Conform to the
provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9,
1998, especially:
-           
Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”;
-         
Article 5(c), which states that “For the purpose of promoting and protecting
human rights and fundamental freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and
in association with others, at the national and international levels (…) to
communicate with non-governmental or intergovernmental organisations”;
-          
Article 6(a), which provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in
associations with others, to know, seek, obtain, receive and hold information
about all human rights and fundamental freedoms”;
-          and
Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures
to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually
and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action
as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in
the present Declaration”.
v.           
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Malawi.
Addresses:
·        
HE Dr. Bingu wa Mutharika, President of the Republic of Malawi, Office
of the President and Cabinet, Private Bag 301, Capital City, Lilongwe 3,
Malawi. Fax: +265 1
788 456; +265 1 789 273.
·        
Hon.
Joyce Banda MP, Vice-President of the Republic of Malawi, Capital City, PO
Box 30399 , Lilongwe 3. Fax: +265 1 788218,
Email : vicepres@malawi.gov.mw
·        
Hon.
Aaron Sangala, Minister of Home Affairs and Internal Security,
Ministry of Home Affairs and Internal Security, Private Bag 331, Capital City,
Lilongwe 3, Malawi. Fax: +265 1 789 509.
·        
Hon.
Dr. George Chaponda MP, Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Ministry
of Justice Headquarters, Capital Hill, Private Bag 333, Lilongwe 3, Malawi.
Fax: +265 1 788 332/841 ; E-mail: justice@malawi.gov.mw
·        
Peter
Mukhito, Inspector General of Police, Malawi Police services Headquarters,
Lilongwe. Fax: + 265 1 797 979.
·        
John
Kapito, Chairperson of
the Malawi National Human Rights Commission, H.B. House, Private Bag 378,
Capital City, Lilongwe 3, Malawi. Fax: +265 01 750 943,
Email: info@malawihrc.org;
·        
Embassy
of the Republic of Malawi in Brussels, Rue de la Loi 15 , 1040 Brussels,
Belgium, Fax: +32 2 231 10 66.   
Please also write to the
diplomatic representations of Malawi in your respective countries.
*** 
Geneva-Paris, March 24, 2011 
Kindly inform us of any action
undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
The Observatory, an OMCT
and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and
aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
· E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
· Tel and fax OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
· Tel and fax FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 