Kyrgyzstan:  Kyrgyzstan: Taalai Turumbekov, envoy of presidential candidate Dooronbek Sadyrbaev, subjected to a severe beating by the head of a village administration
August 30, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2000 / AugustKyrgyzstan: Kyrgyzstan: Taalai Turumbekov, envoy of presidential candidate Dooronbek Sadyrbaev, subjected to a severe beating by the head of a village administrationCase KGZ 230800  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Kyrgyzstan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR), a member of the network, that on 18th August 2000, Taalai Turumbekov, envoy of presidential candidate Dooronbek Sadyrbaev, was subjected to a severe beating by the head of the village administration of Jangy-Aryk, Suultanbek Kadyraliev and his brother Erkebek Kadyraliev whilst attempting to collect signatures.  Furthermore, when Taalai Turumbekov attempted to file a complaint and seek medical treatment he was faced with a number of obstacles.  According to the information received, Kadyraliev approached Turumbekov and took and destroyed the list of signatures that he had collected.  He then began to beat Turumbekov.  He also reportedly threatened the villagers who had witnessed this telling them that they would have their lands confiscated and be denied harvesters if they gave their votes in favour of Sadyrbaev.  As Turumbekov attempted to escape in a car, Sadyrbaev, together with his brother Erkebek Kadyraliev closed the road, dragged him from the car and proceeded to beat him.  In the knowledge that Turumbekov had one false eye, they began to beat his healthy eye stating that they would "set him in darkness forever".  His files of signatures were confiscated and destroyed in front of the crowd. Turumbekov was left bleeding in the road.  Erkebek Kadyraliev then stood on Turumbekov's foot and demanded that he ask for forgiveness for not knowing that he was gathering signatures in favour of a candidate who is the "main enemy" of the northern people.   When approached, the prosecution office of 'Jumgal rayon' reportedly refused to register the complaint of Turumbekov until the prosecutor himself appeared at work.  The prosecutor accepted the complaint but failed to find a medical expert in the rayon.  He was eventually put in hospital but refused a medical examination as it was argued that a certificate could only be given on the orders of the law-enforcement bodies.    It seems that the only treatment given by the chief doctor of the rayon hospital was a prescription of eye drops.  The doctor informed Sadyrbaev that his envoy was in a satisfactory condition and that nothing serious had happened.  Turumbekov, however, suffers from severe headaches and extremely painful aches in his eye as well as all over his body.  When taken to the republican eye clinic in Bishkek, he was immediately hospitalised as a result of his condition.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Kyrgyzstan urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Turumbekov and ensure adequate compensation and rehabilitation for his injuries; ii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these events and bring those responsible before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; iii.	put an immediate end to the persecution and harassment of all persons carrying out their legitimate right to participate in free and fair elections; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  President  of  Kyrgyz Republic Askar Akaev Fax :  +996 (312) 21 86 27  Geneva, August 23, 2000 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 