Lebanon:  The Implementation of the EU-Lebanon Association Agreement Must Be Based on Respect for Human Rights
March 29, 2006
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent Interventions / Lebanon / 2006 / MarchLebanon: The Implementation of the EU-Lebanon Association Agreement Must Be Based on Respect for Human RightsOn the occasion of the entry into force of the Association Agreement between Lebanon and the European Union on 1st April 2006, the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network, the International Federation of Human Rights, the World Organisation against Torture call upon the parties to honour the commitments made in the context of the Association Agreement signed on 17 June 2002, in particular its Article 2, which states that human rights, as an “essential element”, are legally binding.  To give effect to that commitment, the undersigned organisations urge the parties to implement Article 2 fully in their future relations. They also call upon the EU and Lebanon to establish a political mechanism for dialogue, evaluation, and systematic and regular monitoring of the situation of human rights, in the form of a Subcommittee on Human Rights composed of representatives of the Lebanese government and European institutions. The Subcommittee should hold regular consultations with Lebanese and European civil society with a view to assessing the evolution of the situation of human rights.  They also emphasise that the question of human rights should be an essential element in the current negotiations on the future EU-Lebanon Action Plan being developed in the framework of the European Neighbourhood Policy. The human rights chapter of the Action Plan should constitute a roadmap for the implementation of mutual commitments regarding respect for human rights.  The organisations request that the following points be included as essential elements to be discussed within this new framework and at the first meeting of the Association Council, to be held on 12 April 2006:  1.	The resolution of the investigations into forced disappearances and into Lebanese detainees in Lebanon, Syria and Israel;  2.	The elimination of torture, the end to arbitrary detentions, and the respect of guarantees and right to a fair trial, as well as guarantees regarding detention conditions that are in compliance with international instruments for the protection of basic human rights;  3.	Respect and protection of the rights of migrants, refugees – in particular Palestinian refugees – and asylum seekers;  4.	Violations of the rights of human rights defenders and to freedom of association and freedom of expression in general;  5.	Respect for women’s rights, in particular in the context of the fight against human trafficking, and the guarantee to equality between men and women before the law; Contacts:  EMHRN: Sandrine Grenier, Representative in Brussels, +3225133797, sgr@euromedrights.net or Emilie Dromzée, +32 2503 06 86, edr@euromedrights.net    FIDH: Antoine Madelin, Permanent Representative to the European Union, +32485222287, amadelin@fidh.org   OMCT : Laetitia Sédou, Europe Coordinator, +32.2.218.37.19, ls@euro.omct.org 