Sudan:  Sudan: trial witness receives death threats
June  2, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2003 / JuneSudan: Sudan: trial witness receives death threatsCase SDN 020603 Death threats   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sudan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudanese Organisation Against Torture (SOAT), a member of the OMCT network, of death threats against Tajulddin Banaga Mohammed Ahmed, a witness testifying against the internal security forces in Sudan.  According to the information received, Tajulddin Banaga Mohammed Ahmed has been threatened by Sudanese security officers in recent days, and there is a risk that he may be killed because of his testifying in the trail of the persons accused of killing Mr. Ali Ahmed Al Bashir. Mr. Ahmed was a friend and business partner of Mr. Bashir, a Popular Congress party member who was allegedly murdered by members of the Sudanese security forces on May 24th, 2001. Mr. Ahmed was at Mr. Bashir's office in the Arabic Souq area of Khartoum on May 23rd, 2001, when members of the security forces arrived, ransacked the office, and attempted to remove Mr. Bashir's car. Mr. Ahmed was reportedly beaten by members of the security forces at this time. The following day Mr. Bashir, was beaten severely in front of his wife and three children, during which his neck was broken, and then he was shot in the head at point blank range, killing him. The trial of the six Sudanese internal security force members who stand accused of this killing has repeatedly been stalled, and members of Mr. Bashir's family have been pressured to drop the case.  Mr. Ahmed was called to testify at the trial held at the Khartoum North Daruushab Court. Through four sessions he reportedly explained the motive for the murder. Mr. Bashir had been a member of an internal investigation committee in the attempted assassination of Egyptian President Husni Mubarak in Addis Ababa on June 26, 1995. The committee's findings reportedly threatened some high-ranking officials and Mr. Bashir was subjected to significant pressure and numerous propositions withdraw his testimony, which he declined. Following his testimony, Mr. Ahmed was arrested by security officers for making false accusations, and detained for several days before finally being released.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is concerned for Mr. Ahmed's physical and psychological integrity, given the latest threats to his person that have been proffered against him by members of the security forces, with reliable source indicating that there is currently a real threat to his life, notably in light of the increased tensions in Sudan and the harassment and detention of Popular Congress party members. OMCT calls on the Sudanese government to ensure Mr. Ahmed's integrity at all times. Separately, OMCT calls on the authorities to halt the harassment of by Mr. Bashir's family and other members of the Popular Congress, and to also ensure that the trial of Mr. Bashir's killers is prompt and unhindered.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Tajulddin Banaga Mohammed Ahmed; ii.	put an immediate end to the persecution and harassment of the Mr. Ahmed, Mr. Bashir’s family and members of the Popular Congress; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, People’s Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: + 24911 783223  ·	Mr Ali Osman Yassin, Minister of Justice and Attorney General, Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 24911 788941  ·	Mr Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: 24911 779383  ·	Dr Yasir Sid Ahmed, Advisory Council for Human Rights, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: + 24911 770883  ·	His Excellency Ambassador Mr Ibrahim Mirghani Ibrahim, Permanent Mission of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 335, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax : +4122 7312656. E-mail: mission.sudan@ties.itu.int  Please also write to the embassies of Sudan in your respective country.  Geneva, June 2nd, 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 