Sudan:  Release of Mr. Osman Hummaida!
November 28, 2008
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2008 / NovemberSudan: Release of Mr. Osman Hummaida!Paris-Geneva-Cairo, November 28, 2008. The International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), in the framework of their joint programme, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, and the Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies (CIHRS) welcome the release of the human rights defender in Sudan Mr. Osman Hummaida. The Observatory and CIHRS welcome the release on November 28, 2008, at around 12.30 am, Khartoum time, of Mr. Osman Hummaida, human rights researcher and member of OMCT Assembly of Delegates, who had been detained since November 24, 2008 by the National Intelligence and Security Services (NISS) offices in Khartoum North for interrogations related to his human rights activities. Furthermore, Messrs. Abdelmoneim Aljak, human rights defender, and Amir Mohamed Suliman, Chairperson of the Khartoum Centre for Human Rights and Environmental Development (KCHRED), who had also been arrested several times for interrogation, remained free. None of the three human rights defenders have been charged. The Observatory and CIHRS welcome Mr. Osman Hummaida’s release, and thank all the persons, institutions and organisations who intervened in his favour as well as of Messrs. Amir Mohamed Suliman and Abedlmonim Aljak. Nevertheless, our organisations deplore that, in the course of interrogation, Messrs. Osman Hummaida and Abdelmoneim Aljak were subjected to acts of torture and ill-treatment. Our organisations call upon the Sudanese authorities to guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Messrs. Amir Mohamed Suliman, Osman Hummaida and Abedlmonim Aljak, as well as to put an end to any act of harassment against them as well as against all human rights defenders, in conformity with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments ratified by Sudan. For further information, please contact: FIDH: Gael Grilhot / Karine Appy / Julia Bourbon, + 33 1 43 55 25 18 OMCT: Delphine Reculeau, + 41 22 809 49 39 