Iran:  Arbitrary detention of Mr. Reza Dehghan
November 30, 2007
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2007 / NovemberIran: Arbitrary detention of Mr. Reza DehghanIRN 012 / 1107 / OBS 153 Arbitrary detention / Harassment Iran November 30, 2007 The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Iran: Brief description of the information: The Observatory has been informed by the International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC) about the arbitrary arrest of Mr. Reza Dehghan, a member of the Founding Committee of Painters Union (Syndica Nagash), which would be linked to his trade union activities and his vocal support of Mr. Mansour Osanloo, President of the Syndicate of Workers of Tehran and Suburbs Bus Company (Sandikaye Kargarane Sherkat-e Vahed), arbitrarily detained since July 2007. According to the information received, on November 18, 2007, Mr. Reza Dehghan was summoned to court for questioning and was then arrested. He was subsequently brought to Evin Prison, where he remains detained as of issuing this urgent appeal. No information could be obtained as regards the reasons for his arrest. Yet, the Observatory fears that it might be linked to his trade union activities and his vocal support of Mr. Mansour Osanloo.  Indeed, the Observatory recalls that Iranian trade union leaders, and in particular of Sherkat-e Vahed, are regularly subjected to acts of reprisals (See background information). The Observatory expresses its deep concern about Mr. Reza Dehghan’s arbitrary arrest, which takes place in the context of an increasing harassment of human rights defenders, including trade union leaders. The Observatory further recalls that Iran had committed to “uphold the highest standards in the promotion and protection of human rights”[1] by presenting its candidacy to the Human Rights Council 2006 election and had insisted in this regard on the fact that the country had “continuously put great efforts into safeguarding the status and inherent dignity of the human person as well as the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms”[2]. In order to ensure the continuation of these efforts, the Observatory urges the Islamic Republic of Iran to conform with international human rights standards. Background information: On July 10, 2007, Mr. Mansour Osanloo was abducted by unidentified assailants as he was leaving a public bus near his home. According to witnesses, Mr. Osanloo’s assailants beat him severely, and took him away in a metallic grey Peugeot to an undisclosed location. Mr. Osanloo had apparently been followed all day by the unmarked Peugeot car. Such vehicles are well known as being associated with the Iranian Security Forces. On July 12, 2007, Mr. Osanloo’s arrest was acknowledged by the Revolutionary Prosecutor Mortazavi. Since then, Mr. Osanloo was reportedly charged with “conspiring against national security”. On September 3, 2007, the wife of Mr. Mansour Osanloo, Ms. Parvaneh Osanloo, and his sister were briefly arrested in Tehran after they attempted to meet with Ms. Louise Arbour, United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, who was at the time visiting Iran. On October 20, 2007, in the evening, Mr. Osanloo was taken from the Evin prison to Tehran’s Shahid Doktor Labafinejad Hospital in order to receive a successful eye surgery. Mr. Osanloo had already lost the sight of one eye after being denied urgent medical treatment while in detention, and was at risk of becoming totally blind. He is expected to return to prison following a short period of recuperation. In spite of this hospitalisation, the Observatory keeps fearing for Mr. Osanloo’s physical and psychological integrity and considers his detention to be arbitrary as it merely aims at sanctioning his involvement in favour of economic and social rights in Iran. The Observatory recalls that Mr. Osanloo has been subjected to many violations of his rights in the past, including violence and arbitrary detentions, in reason of his activities as a trade union leader in Iran (See Annual Reports 2005 and 2006 of the Observatory). In a worrying development, the lawyers of Mr. Osanloo and his fellow activists from Sherkat-e Vahed have tendered their resignation to the Court on November 27, 2007. The Observatory has not been informed of any tension between the trade union and their lawyers and fears that they might have been subjected to outside pressure. Actions requested: Please write to the authorities in Iran urging them to:  Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Messrs. Reza Dehghan and Mansour Osanloo; Release Messrs. Reza Dehghan and Mansour Osanloo immediately and unconditionally as their detention is arbitrary as they merely sanction their human rights activities; Put an end to all acts of harassment against all Iranian human rights defenders; Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, and Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”; More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments ratified by Iran.  Addresses:  Leader of the Islamic Republic, His Excellency Ayatollah Sayed Ali Khamenei, The Office of the Supreme Leader, Shoahada Street, Qom, Islamic Republic of Iran, Faxes: + 98.21.649.5880 / 21.774.2228, Email: info@leader.ir / istiftaa@wilayah.org / webmaster@wilayah.org; President, His Excellency Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, the Presidency, Palestine Avenue, Azerbaijan Intersection, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: + 98.21.649.5880, E-mail: dr-ahmadinejad@president.ir; Head of the Judiciary, His Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Hashemi Shahrudi, Ministry of Justice, Park-e Shahr, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: +98.21.879.6671 / +98 21 3 311 6567, Email: Irjpr@iranjudiciary.com; Minister of Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Manuchehr Motaki, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Sheikh Abdolmajid Keshk-e Mesri Av, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: + 98.21.390.1999, Email: matbuat@mfa.gov; Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Chemin du Petit-Saconnex 28, 1209 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7330203, Email: mission.iran@ties.itu.int; Ambassador Mr. Ahani, Embassy of Iran in Brussels, avenue Franklin Roosevelt, 15 A. 1050 Bruxelles, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 762 39 15. Email: iran-embassy@yahoo.com.  Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Iran in your respective country. *** Geneva-Paris, November 30, 2007 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need. The Observatory was the winner of the 1998 Human Rights Prize of the French Republic. To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29  [1] In accordance with GA resolution A/RES/60/251 establishing the Human Rights Council. [2] http://www.un.org/ga/60/elect/hrc/iran.pdf 