Internship Announcement - OMCT Human Rights Defenders Programme
August 31, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Links / 2016 / AugustInternship Announcement - OMCT Human Rights Defenders ProgrammeOMCT_HRD Internship description2 pages / 119 KB
 
INTERNSHIP ANNOUNCEMENT
 
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS PROGRAMME
 
The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), the
largest international coalition of non governmental organisations fighting
against torture, summary executions, forced disappearance and all other forms
of cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, is currently seeking to recruit ONE
INTERN for its Human Rights Defenders Programme. 
 
Location: OMCT International Secretariat, Geneva, Switzerland
 
Internship
period: The position should be filled as soon as possible, for
a minimum 4 months. 
 
Please note that internships are not remunerated. Schedule can be flexible and would be agreed
between the supervisor and the intern.
 
information about the
hosting organisation
 
Created in 1985, the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) is today the main international coalition
of NGOs fighting against torture, summary executions, enforced disappearances
and all other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. With
297 affiliated organisations in its SOS-Torture Network, OMCT is the most
important network of non-governmental organisations (NGOs) working for the
protection and the promotion of human rights in the world. 
 
OMCT’s International Secretariat is headquartered
in Geneva and has offices in Brussels and Tunis. OMCT helps members of its SOS-Torture Network protect victims and
human rights defenders across the world, fight against impunity and change legislative and judiciary systems to stop
Governments and individuals from resorting to such practices. OMCT offers
direct assistance and protection to victims of torture and human rights
defenders in imminent danger, advocates the implementation of the International
Convention Against Torture in particular before inter-governmental agencies in
Geneva, submits individual communications and alternative reports to the
United Nations (UN) Special Mechanisms, trains
civil society representatives and State officials, and actively
collaborates in the respect, development and strengthening of international
norms for the protection of human rights. 
 
Through
its Human Rights Defenders Programme,
including through the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (a joint OMCT-FIDH partnership), OMCT
provides and ensures effective protection for human rights defenders. It bases its action on the conviction that
solidarity with and among human rights defenders and their organisations ensures
that their voice is being heard and their isolation and marginalisation broken. It responds to threats and acts of
reprisals suffered by human rights defenders by implementing a comprehensive protection strategy incorporating elements of early-warning, prevention,
advocacy, joint-coordination, outreach, and direct assistance. 
 
tasks to be
performed by the intern during the internship
 
Based in Geneva, the incumbent will work
under the supervision of the Director of OMCT Human Rights Defenders Programme
/ the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders. The intern will
under the guidance of experienced staff at OMCT implement a variety of diverse
tasks on projects of the Human Rights Defenders Programme, providing a unique
and challenging opportunity of learning about concrete human rights advocacy
for those defending human rights often at risk.
 
Activities of the position include:
-      
To assist in the drafting of urgent interventions on
individual cases and other advocacy interventions on cases or legal
developments affecting human rights defenders (in English, French and/or
Spanish).
-      
To assist with the drafting, editing and the
translation of OMCT’s briefings in its programmatic areas, publications and
submissions to UN and regional human rights mechanisms.
-      
To attend meetings and sessions of UN human rights
mechanisms and assist with OMCT advocacy activities for an effective
policy for the protection of human rights defenders.
-      
To assist with the organisation of seminars, trainings
and conferences. 
-      
To assist with the organisation of field missions.
-      
To translate documents.
-      
To assist with other activities on human rights
defenders and on the prevention of torture in support to OMCT Geneva office.
 
qualifications
required
 
-      
University degree in law, international relations,
political or social sciences or related field.
-      
Good knowledge and understanding of international
human rights law, human rights NGOs, UN procedures, EU institutions and
regional mechanisms for the protection of human rights.
-      
Demonstrated commitment to human rights and the rule
of law.
-      
Good drafting and editing skills.
-      
Ability to work under pressure to deadlines and to
adapt to multidisciplinary work in the environment of a multicultural team.
-      
Good interpersonal and communication skills.
-      
Excellent oral and written communication skills in two
of the following languages (English, French or Spanish) with working knowledge
in the remaining language. 
 
applications
 
-      
Applications for this
position should be sent to: dr@omct.org
-      
Please send a cover letter
and a resume
-      
Only short-listed
candidates will be contacted for interviews. 
 
For more information on OMCT, please visit our
website: www.omct.org and http://www.omct.org/human-rights-defenders/ 