United States:  Press Release - No judicial solution in sight for Guantanamo Bay detainees
August 15, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / United States / 2002 / AugustUnited States: Press Release - No judicial solution in sight for Guantanamo Bay detaineesPRESS RELEASE  Geneva, August 15th 2002  No judicial solution in sight for Guantanamo Bay detainees   OMCT would like to express its continuing concern regarding conditions of detention at Guantanamo Bay naval base, in particular in light of recent reports that a number of the detainees, who are possibly suffering from psychiatric problems, have attempted to commit suicide.    The United States has reportedly continued to transfer prisoners to the base, which now allegedly holds 598 persons and is almost at full capacity. Detainees are now reportedly being held in new cells that, while smaller than their previous cells, have metal beds, flushing toilets and running water. There seems to be no indication that any of the persons being held there will ever be charged and submitted to trial proceedings.  According to reports, there have been at least 30 incidents that have been interpreted as suicide attempts. Medical authorities supervising the detainees allegedly indicated that over twenty of the detainees suffer from chronic psychiatric problems.   OMCT would like to reiterate its condemnation of the lack of independent judicial control of the legality of the detention of those being held at the Cuban base, in blatant violation of the United States' obligations under international law. OMCT considers that the ongoing incertitude as to their fate is likely to contribute considerably to the suffering, both of those being held as well as that of their family members. In the case of those suffering from psychiatric problems, the anguish involved could very well lead to a serious deterioration in their mental health.  OMCT would like to call upon the United States to ensure that all detainees currently being held at Guantanamo Bay are provided with adequate medical care and that persons suffering from psychiatric problems are placed in an institution where they can receive necessary treatment. OMCT urges the United States to promptly bring all of the detainees being held at Guantanamo Bay before a competent tribunal.     Contact: OMCT - Tel: +41 22 809 49 39, e-mail: omct@omct.org 