Tajikistan:  Clampdown on civil society - Preliminary findings of a fact-finding mission on the situation of human rights defenders and NGOs
November 30, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Tajikistan / 2015 / NovemberTajikistan: Clampdown on civil society - Preliminary findings of a fact-finding mission on the situation of human rights defenders and NGOsRUSSIAN VERSION_Tajikistan Press Release_Clampdown on civil society2 pages / 248 KB

Geneva-Paris,
November 30, 2015. “The Tajik authorities must put an end to the legal and
administrative harassment of human rights defenders and NGOs in the country”,
said the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (a joint
OMCT-FIDH programme), following a fact-finding mission to Tajikistan.
The inability of lawyers to carry out
their work freely and the draconian restrictions against civil society
organisations, notably those receiving foreign funding, are two of the
principal concerns of the Observatory.
 
The
delegation, who conducted the mission from November 15 to 21, 2015, met with
civil society representatives in Dushanbe and Khujand as well as diplomats. However,
the delegation regrets it was not able to meet neither with the Ombudsman nor
with any representative of the national authorities, notably the Directorate
for Human Rights Guarantees of the Executive Apparatus of the President of
Tajikistan, the Ministry of Justice (MoJ), the Department of Legal Entities
Registration and the Tax Committee, in spite of formal requests
addressed in due course. This denial of dialogue is a worrying
signal that adds to the preoccupying information received during the mission.
 
“At the beginning of 2014, Tajikistan had
pledged to implement international human rights standards both in law and
practice in order to ensure a smooth working environment for civil society. The
current crackdown on independent voices clearly shows this objective was
abandoned and it is about time for Tajikistan to live up to its international
commitments”, declared
Peter Zangl, Representative of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) to
the European Union, who led the mission.
 
The
delegation is concerned that an essential cornerstone of democracy and the rule
of law principle is about to disappear: on November 23, 2015, President Rahmon
signed the recently amended the Law on the Bar Association (Advocatura), which
sets out a new qualification procedure for both experienced lawyers and
barristers, which will undermine their independence. As such, the amended Law
also undermines the independence of the Tajik Bar Association itself, as the
latter would be placed de facto under the MoJ. 
 
Additional
amendments which are currently under consideration by the Government would
further tighten access to the legal profession. Moreover,
it is worrying that it has become nearly impossible to find lawyers in Tajikistan who would accept to defend human rights cases,
including torture related, for fear of criminal prosecution.
Instances of torture and other ill-treatments, which remain widespread in the
country, including in the Armed Forces, therefore go widely unpunished.
 
The testimonies and analyses gathered during the
mission further attest that in Tajikistan human rights NGOs
operate under pressure in an increasingly insecure and bureaucratic
environment. 
 
The mission
delegation is particularly concerned that human rights defenders and
organisations in Tajikistan are subjected to restrictive legislation and
policies, notably through art. 27§2 of the Law “On Public Associations” as
amended by the Parliament on June 10, 2015. The amendments make it mandatory to
declare all grants received by NGOs from donors abroad or from international
organisations to a specialised register at the MoJ. The amendment also
introduces an obligation to notify projects to be implemented with those funds.
Although these amendments have reportedly already entered into force, the
implementing procedures are not yet known nor have they been presented to civil
society. Accordingly, NGOs operate in a high risk, uncertain environment.
 
“We particularly fear
that any
bureaucratic hurdles on public associations receiving foreign funding will result in increased
control by authorities over human rights organisations activities”, declared Ekaterina Vanslova, International
Protection Consultant at the Russian NGO “Committee for Prevention
of Torture”, who was also part of the mission delegation.
 
Furthermore,
increasing unscheduled inspections of NGOs - the legal base of which remains
often unclear - were reported to the mission delegation, sometimes followed by
legal actions for alleged infringements of the law. Those defending the rights
of detainees held on charges involving “religious extremism”, “terrorism” or
“undermining national security”, are particularly monitored by the authorities.

 
Public
foundations, which are not covered by the Law “On Public Associations” but
registered with tax authorities, are equally affected. The Tax Committee of the
Republic of Tajikistan has recently started rejecting public foundations'
registration applications and referring them to the MoJ, which has no
competence over them according to national law. For instance, on June 5, 2015
the Tax Committee brought an action to liquidate the human rights organisation
“Nota Bene Public Foundation” for allegedly taking advantage of gaps in the
legislation when obtaining registration in 2009. The Tax Committee’s claim is
currently being heard by the I. Somoni’s District Court of Dushanbe.
 
The Observatory is concerned about recent developments that
negatively impact the work of human rights organisations and undermine the
crucial role they play. Independence of civil society organisations in
Tajikistan is under threat.

A mission
report will be issued in the coming months and will present detailed
conclusions and recommendations to the Government of Tajikistan, non-State
actors, the United Nations, the European Union, the OSCE and foreign embassies in Tajikistan.The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
For more
information, please contact:
·      
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau / Miguel
Martín Zumalacárregui: +41228094939
·      
FIDH: Arthur Manet / Audrey Couprie:
+ 33143552518 