Russian Federation:  Death threats against Igor Kochetkov, Executive Director of the Russian LGBT Network
February  1, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2019 / FebruaryRussian Federation: Death threats against Igor Kochetkov, Executive Director of the Russian LGBT NetworkURGENT APPEAL - THE
OBSERVATORY

 
RUS 002 / 0219 / OBS 010
Death
threats
Russian Federation
February 1, 2019

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of
FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your
intervention in the following situation in the Russian Federation.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the death threats
against Mr. Igor Kochetkov, Executive Director of the Russian LGBT
Network and long-standing defender of LGBT rights in Russia. 

According
to the information received, a video message directed at Mr. Igor Kochetkov and
the Russian LGBT Network was spread on - or around - January 29, 2019, through
local social networking sites. In the message, Mr. Ali Baskhanov, a Chechen
public figure and a representative of the organising committee of “Noah's Ark”,
an informal group of pro-government Chechen activists, threatens to harm Mr.
Kochetkov if he does not relent from public denunciations of repressions that
were carried out by Chechen authorities against LGBT persons in Chechnya
throughout 2017 and 2018. 
 
In
the recording, Mr. Baskhanov, wearing military fatigues, verbally assaults Mr.
Kochetkov and warns him that in case he “does not stop and does not leave the
Chechen Republic in peace”, this will be his end. Echoing earlier statements by
Chechen officials, including Chechnya’s President Ramzan Kadyrov, who stated on
numerous occasions that gays do not exist in the Republic and that human rights
defenders are not welcome in Chechnya, Mr. Baskhanov denies the existence of
LGBT persons in the Republic. Mr. Kochetkov and the Russian LGBT Network are
planning to submit a formal complaint to the Investigative Committee of Russia
to compel an investigation of these publicly voiced threats.
 
On
January 29, 2019, a few hours before receiving the threats, the Russian LGBT
Network had submitted a complaint to the Investigative Committee of Russia
asking it to probe into allegations of illegal detention, as well as torture
and at least one murder, of at least 14 LGBT individuals in the Zavodskoy
police department and in the Grozny building of the Ministry of Internal
Affairs of Russia. The organisation seeks to compel the Russian authorities to
react to the most recent wave of detention of LGBT persons and anti-gay
campaigns by security forces in the Russian Republic of Chechnya. The
above-mentioned death threats against Mr. Kochetkov are believed to be a
response to the complaint filed by his NGO, and to its previous actions to
protect the rights of LGBT persons in Chechnya.
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the death threats against Mr. Igor Kochetkov and
calls on the Russian authorities to immediately carry out an independent and
thorough investigation into these threats and ensure that those responsible are
held to account and that all human rights defenders are able to carry out their
legitimate activities without any hindrance and fear of reprisals. 
 
Background information
 
First information about the mass repression targeting
gay men in Chechnya appeared in the spring of 2017. Based on the information
supplied in large part by the LGBT Network, a number of media outlets reported
the arrest of over 100 individuals between February and April 2017, many of
whom were tortured and murdered by Chechen authorities. These reports also
revealed the existence of secret prisons used to detain gays or those suspected
of homosexuality in the region where the tortures took place. In July, the
Russian LGBT Network published a report documenting the persecution and torture
of LGBT persons in the North Caucasus[1].
The Network has played a leading role in providing help to victims of the
repression, among others by setting up an emergency aid hotline for LGBT victims
of hate crimes. Since spring 2017, the Russian LGBT Network evacuated about 150
people from the region. More than 130 of them had left Russia. 
 
Mr. Igor Kochetkov, who undertook the role of the
spokesperson of the Russian LGBT Network, was instrumental in advocating for an
effective investigation and accountability for these crimes. His advocacy
before national authorities and the Organisation for Security and Co-operation
in Europe (OSCE) led to the international investigation into grave human rights
violations in Chechnya within the legal framework of the so-called Moscow
mechanism. The report delivered by the Mechanism, set up by 16 OSCE
Participating States, confirmed the systematic use of torture and extrajudicial
killings of LGBTI persons in Chechnya in the spring of 2017.
 
After a brief respite, a new wave of persecutions began
in December 2018 in Grozny shortly after the publication of the Moscow
Mechanism report. About 40 people were detained in Chechnya on suspicion of
homosexuality: victims were brutally beaten and tortured with electricity, at
least two of them were tortured to death by security forces. 
 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities of Russia asking them to:
 
i.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical integrity and psychological
well-being of Mr. Igor Kochetkov and all human rights defenders in the country;
 
ii.
Carry out an immediate, thorough, impartial, and transparent investigation into
the above-mentioned threats against Mr. Igor Kochetkov in order to identify all
those responsible, bring them before an independent tribunal, and sanction them
as provided by the law; 
 
iii.
Put an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against
Mr. Igor Kochetkov, any member of the LGBT Network, and all human rights
defenders in the country; 
 
iv.
Ensure in all circumstances that human rights defenders are able to carry out
their legitimate activities without any hindrance and fear of reprisals;
 
v.
Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in
particular its Articles 1, 6(a), 9, 11 and 12.2;
 
vi.
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
in accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by the Russian Federation.
 
Addresses:
 
Mr. Vladimir Putin,
     President of the Russian Federation, Fax: + 7 495 606 3602; + 7 495 625
     3581Mr. Dimitri Medvedev,
     Prime Minister of the Russian Federation, Twitter: @MedvedevRussiaMr. Sergueï Lavrov,
     Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, Fax: + 7 495 644
     2203Permanent Mission of the
     Russian Federation to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41
     22 734 40 44, E-mail: mission.russian@vtxnet.chEmbassy of the Russian
     Federation in Brussels, Belgium. Fax: +32 2 374 26 13. E-mail: mission.russian@vtxnet.chPermanent Representation
     of the Russian Federation to the Council of Europe, France. Fax: (+33) (0)
     3 88 24 19 74. Email: russia.coe@orange.fr
 
Please also write
to the diplomatic representations of the Russian Federation in your respective
countries.
 
***
 
Paris-Geneva,
February 1, 2019
 
Kindly inform us
of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to
prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. FIDH
and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders
Mechanism implemented by international civil society.  
 
To contact the
Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.orgTel and fax FIDH +33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18
     80Tel and fax OMCT +41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / +41 22 809 49 29
 



[1]    https://www.osce.org/odihr/407402?download=true 