Russian Federation:  Russian Federation: Fear for the safety of Ms. Elena Vasiljeva, a political activist
June 25, 2009
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2009 / JuneRussian Federation: Russian Federation: Fear for the safety of Ms. Elena Vasiljeva, a political activistCase RUS 250609 Harassment and threats/ Fear for safety  The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the Russian Federation. Brief description of the situation The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Russian-Chechen Friendship Society (RCFS), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the concerns for the safety of Ms. Elena Vasiljeva, a member of the United Civic Front, Murmansk branch, and the Solidarity Movement, following several acts of harassment and threats. According to the information received, on 5 April 2009, Ms. Elena Vasiljeva was on the train back from the Solidarity Mouvement meeting that was held in Tambov, when she was allegedly assaulted by a man who had reportedly previously followed her in Tambov. He reportedly hit her in the chest and said « we will make you break the habit of visiting Tambov region », following which she fainted and was brought to the hospital in Michurinsk where she stayed until 7 April 2009 (she had later to be hospitalized again for two weeks until 18 May 2009). It is also reported that before departing Tambov, train railway station policemen tried to detain Ms. Elena Vasiljeva, arguing that they had received the order. However, when a colleague of Ms. Elena Vasiljeva called the Tambov officer-on-duty at the Prosecutor‘s Office to inquire about the alleged order, the policemen gave Ms. Elena Vasiljeva her documents and rail ticket back. At the hospital, Ms. Elena Vasiljeva was reportedly questioned by a police officer, reportedly deputy head at the Prosecutor’s Office of Michurinsk, on the event. When she mentioned that she had recognized her assailant as a man who she saw with the police patrol at Tamabov train station, the deputy head reportedly did not take notice and said that he would know who it was. He would have reportedly added that the most secure method to kill is to throw the person off the train and that her assailant had chosen an unusual way to get rid of somebody. Furthermore, according to the same information, on 14 May 2009, Michurinsk police refused to open a criminal case into the assault, reportedly because “it was not possible to identify the person who allegedly attacked Ms. Vasiljeva”. The police document also reportedly mentioned that she has participated in various protests in Murmansk region and she is a notorious anti-government protester, having heart and alcohol problems. The document further reportedly concludes that there are no grounds to believe that Ms. Vasiljeva was assaulted.  Later on 20 May 2009, Ms. Vasiljeva’s flat was reportedly raided by the police and her computer seized. According to the same information, beginning of June 2009, relatives and colleagues of Ms. Elena Vasiljeva received emails from an unknown sender informing about her alleged death. The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Elena Vasiljeva following these events. OMCT calls on the competent authorities to carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into these events, the results of which must be made public, in order to bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law. OMCT further calls on the authorities to stop the acts of harassment and threats against Ms. Elena Vasiljeva which seem to merely target her political activities. OMCT has already documented cases of Russian political activists who have been subjected to ill-treatment up to extrajudicial killing because of their activities. Action requested Please write to the authorities in the Russian Federation urging them to:   Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Elena Vasiljeva;  Carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into these events, in particular the allegations of ill-treatment and threats, the results of which must be made public, in order to bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  Ensure that adequate, effective and prompt reparation, including adequate compensation, proper medical care and rehabilitation, is granted to the victim;  Ensure the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  Dmitry Anatolyevich Medvedev, President of the Russian Federation, Kremlin, Moscow, Russia, Faxes:+ 7 495 206 5173 / 230 2408, Email: president@gov.ru; Prosecutor General of the Russian Federation, Mr. Yuri Chayka,, 125993, Moskva K-31, Ul. B. Dimitrovka, d 15a, Russian Federation, Fax: + 7 (495)692-17-25; Chairwoman of the Presidential Human Rights Commission of the Russian Federation, Ella Pamfilova, 103132 g. Moskva, Staraya ploshchad, d 8/5,pod 3, Russian Federation, Fax: +7 495 20 64 855; Vladimir Lukin, Russian Federal Ombudsman for Human Rights, Fax: +7 495 207-74-70; Minister of Internal Affairs, Rashid Nurgaliev, ul. Zhitnaya, 16, 117049 Moscow, Russian Federation, Telegram: Rossiia, 117049, Moskva, Fax: + 7 495 237 49 25; Minister of Foreign Affairs, Sergey Lavrov, Smolenskaya-Sennaya pl, 32/34, 121200 Moscow, Russian Federation, Telegram: Fax:+ 7 495 230 21 30; Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the United Nations in Geneva Av. de la Paix 15, CH-1211, Geneva 20, Switzerland, e-mail : mission.russian@ties.itu.int, fax: +4122 734 40 44;  Please also write to the diplomatic representations of the Russian Federation in your respective countries.  Geneva, 25 June 2009 Kindly inform OMCT of any action undertaken quoting the code number of this appeal in your reply 