Bahrain:  Joint Press Release: The price for speaking out: Nabeel Rajab sentenced to 5 years for tweeting in Bahrain
February 21, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2018 / FebruaryBahrain: Joint Press Release: The price for speaking out: Nabeel Rajab sentenced to 5 years for tweeting in Bahrain

Beirut-Geneva-Paris, February 21, 2018 - Today in Bahrain, prominent human rights
defender Nabeel Rajab, BCHR President and FIDH Deputy Secretary General, was
sentenced to 5 years in prison under trumped-up charges in relation to tweets
denouncing the torture against detainees at Jaw prison and exposing the killing
of civilians in Yemen by the Saudi-led coalition. This
surrealistic verdict, after a trial that was by itself a mockery of justice,
illustrates once again the current crackdown of any dissenting voice in
Bahrain, where scores of critics are currently jailed. The Observatory
(FIDH-OMCT) and BCHR reiterate their call to the Bahraini authorities to
immediately release him as well as all detained human rights defenders.
 
Nabeel Rajab was convicted today based on Article 133 of the Bahraini Criminal Code (“disseminating false rumours
in time of war”), Article 215 (“offending a foreign country [Saudi Arabia]”)
and Article 216 (“insulting a statutory body”). Rajab’s charges include
a tweet from March 26, 2015, the day the Saudi-led coalition launched air
strikes in Yemen, criticising wars that “bring hatred, destruction and
horrors”. On December 4, 2017, in a public statement announcing the appointment
of a group of experts to investigate the violations committed in Yemen, the
United Nations (UN) High Commissioner for Human Rights Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein used nearly the same words to
describe the situation in Yemen: “For three years,
the people of Yemen have been subjected to death, destruction and despair”. 
 
“Nabeel
Rajab is not a criminal, he is a prominent human rights defender and political
prisoner. This new outrageous sentence contributes to further
shut down space for civil society in the country”, FIDH President Dimitris Christopoulos highlighted.

 
“This continuous harassment, which illustrates once more the
Government’s relentless efforts to silence the
whole Bahraini civil society, must stop. It is urgent for the
international community to make sure Bahrain’s authorities cannot get away with
their crackdown on human rights defenders any longer”, OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock added.
 
Today
Bahrain is under a blackout, preventing local human rights activists from
expressing themselves or traveling, and forbidding foreign journalists and
human rights defenders from investigating. In October 2017, a delegation of FIDH board and former board members
seeking to show solidarity with Nabeel and other imprisoned human rights
defenders was denied entry to the country.
 
The
ongoing case against Nabeel Rajab, which began in April 2015, has been
postponed 20 times and on several occasions the Court violated criminal
procedure law by announcing the holding of the trial with only a few days’
notice, and no explanation to Rajab’s lawyers. His lawyers reported they were
therefore unable to prepare his defence or call their witnesses to testify in
court. 
 
Nabeel
Rajab has been in arbitrary, solitary and pre-trial detention since June 13,
2016, despite his deteriorating health conditions. After being hospitalised,
his return to prison has been marked by new persecutions and dangerous,
humiliating and degrading detention conditions. Beaten on his arrival, and
woken up and searched in the middle of the night, his belongings were
confiscated and his head was shaved. Since November 20, 2017, he is being held
in Jaw prison in a segregated wing with convicted ISIS terrorists, putting
his safety at risk. 
 
Our
organisations reiterate their fears for Nabeel’s health status and renew their
call to the authorities to enable him to receive an adequate medical treatment,
and to release him immediately and unconditionally.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.
 
Press contacts:
·      
FIDH: Audrey
Couprie: +33 6 48 05 91 57 
·      
OMCT:
Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39 
·      
BCHR: Julie
Gromellon: +961 81 784 437 