Iran:  Release of a human rights lawyer, while others remain arbitrarily detained and harassed
April 28, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Iran / 2011 / AprilIran: Release of a human rights lawyer, while others remain arbitrarily detained and harassed

THE OBSERVATORY - PRESS RELEASE

IRAN: Release of a human rights lawyer, while others remain
arbitrarily detained and harassed
Paris-Geneva, April 28, 2011. The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for
Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), welcomes
the release of human rights lawyer Mohammad Oliaiyfard, but expresses its deepest concern over the arbitrary detention of other
human rights lawyers in the Islamic Republic of Iran
On April 18, 2011, human rights lawyer Mohammad
Oliaiyfard was released after serving a one-year prison sentence. He had
been arrested on May 1, 2010 and imprisoned
on the same day following a sentence by Branch 26 of the Revolutionary Court dated
February 7, 2010[1]
on charges of “propaganda against the system by giving interviews to the
foreign media about Behnoud’s case”[2]. The
Observatory welcomes his release, but strongly deplores the ongoing harassment
against a number of other human rights lawyers.
On April
23, 2011 indeed, the lawyer of Mr. Mohammad
Seifzadeh, prominent human rights
lawyer and founding member of the Defenders of Human Rights Centre (DHRC),
announced that his client had been arrested and was held in a detention centre
of the Intelligence Department in the North-Western City of Urumiyeh. Mr.
Seifzadeh, who had been missing since April 11, was reportedly allowed to give
a brief phone call to his family, and to be visited by his son. Following the
visit, which lasted about two minutes, his son declared that his father was not
in good health, had lost weight, and was limping. His lawyer was however not
allowed to visit him, but the magistrate in charge of his case told Mr.
Seifzadeh's lawyer that his client had been arrested on April 11, 2011 for
allegedly having “interviewed two dozen Afghans there”, without providing
further information. On October 29, 2010, Mr. Mohammad Seifzadeh had been
sentenced to 9 years imprisonment and to a 10 years ban to practice as lawyer
by Branch 15 of the Revolutionary Court, on charges of “acting against national
security” through founding the DHRC, and “propaganda against the regime”
through interviews with foreign media. He had appealed his sentence.
In addition, Ms. Nasrin
Sotoudeh, a human rights lawyer arrested on September 4, 2010 and sentenced
on January 9, 2011 to 11 years imprisonment, 10 years of ban on professional
activities and 10 years of ban on travelling abroad, for supposed
"assembly and conspiracy with the intention to commit offences against the
security of the state", "propaganda against the regime", and
"membership in an illegal organisation", remains arbitrarily detained
to date in a solitary cell of Section 209 of Evin Prison. 
In another case brought
against Ms. Sotoudeh for which
she was tried by Branch 26 of the Islamic Revolution Court in late December
2010 and February 2011, Ms. Sotoudeh was sentenced on April 19, 2011 to a
500,000 Iranian rials fine (US$40) for failing “to observe the hejab” (Islamic
dress code). Her prosecution and sentence follows a video taken during a
ceremony in Italy on the occasion of a human rights prize being awarded to her,
where she had not worn the headscarf. It is to be noted however that under the
Iranian law, the Islamic Revolution Court does not have jurisdiction over such
offence[3].
The Observatory firmly denounces the ongoing
arbitrary detention of Messrs. Mohammad Seifzadeh and Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh as
well as of dozens of human rights defenders in Iran[4],
with the only aim to sanction the legitimate exercise of their human right activities,
amid the current general crackdown on the Iranian civil society. 
The Observatory urges the Iranian authorities to
put an end to these acts of harassment against human rights defenders, to
immediately and unconditionally release those presently detained in the
country, and more generally to conform to the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
international human rights instruments ratified by Iran.
For further information,
please contact:
FIDH: Arthur Manet : + 33 1 43 55 25 18OMCT: Seynabou Benga / Delphine
Reculeau : + 41 22 809 49 39



[1]              
Following his sentencing, Mr. Oliayfard had been briefly detained from March 8
to 15, 2010, and released because some legal technicality had not been complied
with (i.e. the original sentence had not been communicated to all of his
lawyers).


[2]              
Mr. Behnoud Shojaee was a 'juvenile offender' executed in October 2009 in Evin
prison.


[3]               The subject matter jurisdiction of the
Court is limited to offences against internal
and external security; moharebeh and corruption on earth; insult to founder of
the Islamic Republic of Iran and the current leader; conspiracy against the
Islamic Republic of Iran; armed actions; espionage; drug-related crimes; claims concerning Article 49 of the
Constitution (related to confiscation of all wealth accumulated through
"usury, usurpation, bribery, embezzlement, theft, gambling, misuse of
endowments, misuse of government contracts and transactions, the sale of
uncultivated lands and other resources subject to public ownership, the
operation of centers of corruption, and other illicit means and sources".


[4]              See
latest Urgent Appeals of the Observatory: IRN 001/0211/OBS 024 and IRN
002/0311/OBS 052. 