European Union (EU):  HRDN Statement: Promoting Human Rights and Democracy?in the next EU Multiannual Financial Framework
March  1, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / European Union (EU) / 2018 / MarchEuropean Union (EU): HRDN Statement: Promoting Human Rights and Democracy in the next EU Multiannual Financial Framework
The 51 member organisations of the Human Rights and Democracy Network 
(HRDN),
of which the OMCT is a member organisation, consider that the European Union’s commitments spelled out in 
Article 2 and 21 of the Treaty remain fully relevant. The EU 
institutions and its member states must guide the negotiations of the 
future Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF) in a direction that 
reinforces human rights through the EU’s internal and external financial
 instruments.    
March 2018 
Repressive governments are pursuing a
backlash against democracy and human rights, diminishing civic space and
creating a chilling effect for those working to promote and protect human
rights. Civicus Monitor lists
108 countries as Obstructed, Repressed, or Closed and shows a serious downward
trend for freedom of assembly, association and expression. 
Civil society organisations (CSOs) and
individual human rights defenders (HRDs) have been directly affected. Instead
of being recognised as essential actors for the democratic functioning of
society, the legitimacy of the work of civil society organisations is being
questioned and CSOs subjected to smear-campaigns. This is true both outside and
inside the EU. 
In this context, the 51 member
organisations of the Human Rights and Democracy Network (HRDN) consider that
the European Union’s commitments spelled out in Article 2 and 21 of the Treaty
remain fully relevant. The EU institutions and its member states must guide the
negotiations of the future Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF) in a direction
that reinforces human rights through the EU’s internal and external financial
instruments. 
Specifically the HRDN calls on the EU
institutions and Member States to: 
1. Oppose the merging of the EIDHR
within a single External Financing Instrument 
The EIDHR was created on the initiative
of the European Parliament in 1994, after years of inter-institutional
negotiations. It has since become a visible symbol of the EU’s global
leadership in supporting human rights and democracy. 
This instrument has proven to be a
crucial tool to support civil society organisations and individual human rights
defenders, and has been an important source of funding for democratic
reforms and the protection and promotion of human
rights. Putting the existence of the EIDHR, as a
single, distinct and visible instrument into question, would send a negative
signal. It would, not only put already vulnerable organisations and individuals
at risk, but would also call into question the EU’s global leadership and
commitment, to protect and promote democracy and human rights, and those who
defend them. 
The EIDHR is one of the smallest EU’s
external financing instruments – with € 1,3 billion budget for the current
7-year period: it represents 0.001% of the 2014-2020 EU budget. Despite this,
the instrument’s relevance, impact, sustainability, efficiency and added-value
are outstanding – as was highlighted in a recent external evaluation[1]. The evaluation also insisted
that the EIDHR has a specific value, especially in a context where it has
become more and more difficult to support democracy and human rights. 
The EU should preserve a dedicated
EIDHR instrument, boost its budget, and prevent the reallocation of funds from
EIDHR to other financial lines. 
2. Preserve and reinforce the EIDHR
instrument 
The EIDHR has unique features and
modalities. In particular, it is able to fund individuals and organisations
working on human rights and democracy in difficult circumstances, independent
of the consent of the national government. 
The instrument can support both
registered and unregistered organisations; organisations without legal
personality, as well as individual human rights defenders. It is universal,
responsive and offers flexibility in terms of confidentiality, reporting and
sub- granting. 
All these elements make the EIDHR
particularly relevant in difficult and closed environments. As these conditions
are becoming more prevalent, the instrument’s added-value and relevance is
greater than ever. It also makes the EIDHR key for supporting democratic
processes, by assisting elements of the democratic system that the executive
branch of a partner country may not prioritise – such as work with parliaments,
support to the media, support to a representative political party system and to
civil society organisations working on democracy. 
The future MFF should also aim to
increase core funding to CSOs and allow more flexibility to co-financing obligations
and multiannual partnerships. Providing this type of structural support to CSOs
will allow organisations to prioritise and act swiftly in response to emerging
threats. Core funding will also enable organisations to plan, focus on
structural changes and tackle new and complex challenges. 
The EU should maintain and reinforce
the unique features of the EIDHR and its
structural support to human rights and democracy. In
particular, measures to ensure that funding reaches human rights defenders most
at risk need to be strengthened, as well as more flexibility in supporting
organisations and individuals and democratic institutions. 
3. Mainstream human rights and
democracy and support to civil society through other instruments 
Human rights and democracy should also
be fully and effectively integrated into the geographic instruments – and a
rights-based approach implemented. One element should be to ensure that civil
society is actively involved in the design, implementation and monitoring of EU
cooperation programmes. It should be a top priority for the EU to ensure that
all recipients of EU aid are obliged to commit to, and implement, international
human rights standards in all their work. 
The EU should mainstream human rights
and democracy into all financing instruments. 
4. Ensure targeted support to human
rights work within the EU 
Over the last years it has become
increasingly evident that attacks against civil society are also happening
within the EU. The recent report of the European Union Agency for Fundamental
Rights “Challenges facing civil society organisations working on human rights
in the EU” (January 2018), demonstrates that it has become harder for civil
society organisations to continue their work to protect, promote and fulfil
human rights across the Union. Specifically on funding, the report notes an
overall decrease in available funds, as well as range of legal and practical
obstacles in accessing funds. 
In its external relations, and
specifically through the creation of the EIDHR, the EU and its Member States
have placed great emphasis on supporting human rights organisations. The same
attention is needed within the EU, without compromising vital work externally. 
In this context we urge the EC to
create a funding instrument to support civil society organisations working on
human rights in EU member states. It should include funds for monitoring,
advocacy, litigation and education and support both national and community
based organisations. It should also look into improving the flexibility of
the instruments to enable sustainable work by local structures, with special
attention to the need for core funding and the possibility for re-granting
schemes. Some of the same features as the EIDHR should also be included
i.e. the possibility to offer support to both registered and unregistered
organisations, support to individual human rights defenders, and
confidentiality where necessary. 
The EU should create a funding
instrument dedicated to the work of human rights organisations in EU member
states. 
In this circumstances the HRDN
therefore calls on the EU institutions and member states to: maintain a
dedicated EIDHR instrument to support the work of CSOs and HRDs in the next
MFF; mainstream human rights and democracy throughout other instruments; and
create a fund to support the core work of human rights organisations within the
EU. 
 



The Human Rights and Democracy Network (HRDN) is an informal grouping of NGOs
operating at EU level in the broader areas of human rights, democracy and conflict prevention.
Participation in the network is open to non-governmental organizations which engage at EU
level in the promotion of human rights, democracy and conflict prevention in and outside the
EU.

The vision of the HRDN is that human rights and democracy are placed at the heart of the
EU's internal and external policy agenda. This vision should manifest itself in a EU that
effectively protects human rights at home and is a force for positive change in the world. In
pursuit of this vision, the network aims to influence EU and member state human rights policies
and the programming of their funding instruments to promote democracy, human rights and
sustainable peace.








[1]                 European Commission, Evaluation of the European
Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights (EIDHR) 2014-2020, 30 June 2017,
https://ec.europa.eu/europeaid/evaluation-european-instrument-democracy-and-human-rights-eidhr-2014-2020-draft-evaluation-report-
1_en 