Sudan:  Sudan: Arbitrary arrests/torture/forced disappearance in or near Kalma IDP Camp
June  1, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2005 / JuneSudan: Sudan: Arbitrary arrests/torture/forced disappearance in or near Kalma IDP CampCase SDN 010605/SDN 010605.CC URGENT APPEAL/CHILD CONCERN Arbitrary arrest and Detention /Forced disappearance/Torture  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received information concerning the following situation in Sudan.   Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudan Organisation Against Torture (SOAT), a member of the OMCT network, of a series of incidents that took place in or near the Kalma IDP Camp, in which people were injured by police forces.  On 21 May 2005, police officers arrested five IDPs in the Kalma Camp, one of which was injured as a result of the incident that occurred the day before. The following IDP’s were taken to the Nyala West Central Police Station and to the Security Centre where they remain in detention: Those held in Nyala Wasat (central) police station are: Abdalla AlRahman, (24 yrs), Abd Al Ghani Ismail (32 yrs), Karam Aldin Ibrahim Zakaria (Injured, receiving medical care). Those held in the security detention centre: Bashair Adam Suliman (38 yrs), Abu Joumma Mohammed (28 yrs).  On 20 May 2005, clashes between police forces and the IDP resulted in the death of a police officer and at least 33 persons. Mr. Nasir Adam Mohamed Ali, an IDP, sustained serious injuries as a result of being stabbed by a police officer. The precursor for the clash was the attempt by police officers to harass and remove equipment belonging to women working in a small camp market. Mr. Nasir intervened and was subsequently stabbed. Other IDP’s responded by using knives, stones, and sticks to attack the police officers. In addition, IDP’s set a police car on fire as well as tents belonging to Humanitarian Aid Commission, Saudi Arabia Red Crescent and the Norwegian Refugee Council.  According to the information received, on 10 May 2005, police officers arrested 15 IDP leaders at a small market inside the Kalma IDP Camp. The IDP’s were taken to a place inside the market where they were tortured for over an hour. The police officers used their hand, sticks and gun butts to beat the IDP’s. In addition, the officers shaved the IDP’s hair. Soulieman Ali, who is from the Fur tribe and who lives in Kalma Camp. No. 2, is the only victim who has been identified.  Although no reason was given for the arrests, it is believed that the arrests are connected to government demands for IDP’s in the Kalma Camp to return to their villages or to accept relocation. In the week preceding these arrests, government officials visited the camp three times and on the last visit, on 5 May 2005, the government officials warned the IDP leaders that all IDP’s had to leave the camp by the end of May.  According to the information received, on 21 April 2005, officers from military intelligence in Nyala arrested Khayri Ali Musa Alia, 16 years old, and Abdel Raheam. On 22 April 2005, Mr. Rahmean was released after being questioned by military officers about his relationship with Khayri and the possession of arms and ammunitions. Upon learning of Mr. Raheam’s release, Mr. Khayri’s brother, Ahmed Ali Musa, went to the military detention centre but upon arrival was told by military officers that they did not know of Mr. Khayri’s arrest or his whereabouts. Ahmed Ali Musa has since conducted a search of all military and police custody centres and has been unable to locate his brother. OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of all the above-mentioned persons. The International Secretariat of OMCT recalls that Article 20 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Articles 21 and 22 of the International Covenant of Civil and Political Rights, to which Sudan is party. Furthermore, OMCT wishes to emphasise that International standards for the use of force by law enforcement officials as set forth in the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials, adopted by General Assembly resolution 34/169 of 17 December 1979 provides under Article 2 that, "in the performance of their duty, law enforcement officials shall respect and protect human dignity and maintain and uphold the human rights of all persons." Commentary (b) to Article 3 proclaims, "In no case should this provision be interpreted to authorise the use of force which is disproportionate to the legitimate objective to be achieved." OMCT would like to recall that Sudan should, as a State party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, under Article 40, “recognize the right of every child alleged as, accused of, or recognized as having infringed the penal law to be treated in a manner consistent with the promotion of the child’s sense of dignity and worth (…).”   Requested Action: Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:  i. Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of all the above-mentioned persons;  ii. Guarantee that adequate medical care is provided and that reparations be awarded to the victims and their families,  iii. Order the immediate release of all detainees in the absence of valid legal charges, or if legitimate charges exist, bring them before an impartial tribunal and guarantee procedural rights at all times;  iv. Order a thorough and impartial investigation into the above events, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before an impartial tribunal and guarantee procedural rights at all times;  v. Guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international humanitarian law and human rights standards.   Addresses: His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, President' s Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 783223  His Excellency Ali Osman Mohamed Taha, First Vice-President, People’s Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum Sudan, Fax: +249 183 771025  Mr. Ali Mohamed Osman Yassin, Minister of Justice and Attorney General, Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 788941  Mr. Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affair, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 779383   Dr. Abdelmuneim Osman Mohamed Taha, Advisory Council for Human Rights, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 770883  His Excellency Ambassador Mr. Mohamed Al- Hassan Ahmed Al-Haj, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Sudan to the United Nations, Avenue Blanc 47, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 731 26 56, E-mail: mission.sudan@bluewin.ch  Please also write to the embassies of Sudan in your respective country.  Geneva, 1st June 2005  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 