Syrian Arab Republic:  UN Working Group Declares Detention of Prominent Human Rights Defenders Illegal
January 16, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2014 / JanuarySyrian Arab Republic: UN Working Group Declares Detention of Prominent Human Rights Defenders IllegalARABIC_UN Working Group Declares Detention of Prominent Human Rights Defenders Illegal1 page / 5.76 MB

Paris-Geneva,
January 16, 2014 - Alerted by Syrian and international human rights
organisations, the United Nation’s expert body on the issue of arbitrary
detention has found the detention of Mazen Darwish, Hani Al Zaitani and Hussein
Ghrer arbitrary and calls for their release. The three men currently stand
trial before an exceptional court in Damascus, the Anti-Terrorism Court, for
charges related to their work with the Syrian Center for Media and Freedom of
Expression (SCM), a Syrian NGO working for the promotion and protection of
human rights. 
“I hope that this
renewed condemnation of the arbitrary detention of my husband and his
colleagues will be taken into consideration by the judges in Damascus at the
next hearing on January 27, 2014 and result in their release”, says Yara Bader,
wife of Mazen Darwish and acting Director of the SCM.
We
recall that Mazen Darwish, the founder and Director of SCM, as well as Hani
Al Zaitani and Hussein Ghrer, both members of SCM, were arrested by
members of the Syrian Air Force Intelligence during a raid on SCM offices in
Damascus on February 16, 2012. For the nine months following their arrest, they
were detained without access to the outside world. No lawyer or relative was
able to speak to them and their detention was kept in secret.
In
November 2012, the three men were finally brought to Damascus Central Prison in
Adra, where they remain to date, and received a first visit by their relatives.
Shortly before this transfer, they had been informed of their upcoming trial
before the Anti-Terrorism Court in Damascus, an instance known for its
disrespect of fair trial standards. 
Since
then, the men were brought before the Anti-Terrorism Court for hearings on
several occasions, but the proceedings were time and again postponed, also due
to the absence of cooperation on the side of the Air Force Intelligence, which
had been requested to provide evidence to the Prosecution. All three of them
stated that they had been subjected to torture and ill-treatment while in
custody but the judges have so far failed to open investigations into these
allegations as is their obligation under international law.
These
and other facts were examined by the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention in
its Opinion No. 43/2013, on the basis of information provided by, amongst
others, FIDH and OMCT, within the framework of the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders. After noting that the Syrian authorities
did not contest the information presented to it, “the Working Group
considers that the applicants [Darwish, Al Zaitani and Ghrer], human rights
defenders, have been deprived of liberty due to their human rights activities”.
The experts add that the men’s arrest was due to the exercise of their right to
freedom of expression and finally affirm “that the non-observance of the
international norms relating to the right to a fair trial (...) in this case is
of such gravity as to give the deprivation of liberty (...) an arbitrary
character”.
“The
Working Group believes that, taking into account all the circumstances of the
case, the adequate remedy would be to release Messrs. Mazen Darwish, Mohamed
Hani Al Zaitani, Hussein Hammad Ghrer and accord them an enforceable right to
compensation (...)”.
We
take this as an occasion to reiterate our call for the unconditional and
immediate release of Mazen Darwish, Hani Al Zaitani and Hussein Ghrer as well
as all other human rights defenders detained in Syria in violation of their
fundamental rights. 
For more information, please contact:
·      
FIDH: Audrey Couprie / Arthur Manet: +33 1 43 55 25 18
·      
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39 