Russian Federation:  Denial of medical care to Mr. Sergey Udalzov despite his medical condition
December 20, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2011 / DecemberRussian Federation: Denial of medical care to Mr. Sergey Udalzov despite his medical conditionRUS 201211
Denial of medical care/ Arbitrary
detention/ Fear for the safety
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in
the following situation inthe
Russian Federation.
Brief Description of the Situation
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been
informed by the Russian-Chechen Friendship Society (RCFS), a member
organisation of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the arrest and administrative detention
of Mr. Sergey Udalzov, leader of the
political group Left Front and one of the organisers of a peaceful protest against
alleged election fraud that took place in Moscow, beginning of December 2011. OMCT is
concerned about his health since he has been denied adequate medical care. 
According to the information received, Mr.
Sergey Udalzov was arrested on 4
December 2011, the day of parliamentary elections in Russia, by policemen in
plain clothes at the exit of a metro station, in Moscow, and sentenced to
five days administrative custody for allegedly refusing to obey lawful demand
of the police. According to a witness’s testimony, the place of arrest
indicated in the police report was not the one where the arrest took place. 
On 7 December 2011, Mr. Sergey Udalzov was taken to the hospital
after he started a dry hunger strike. The term of his sentence ended on 9 December 2011 but he was not
released. When he tried to leave the hospital to participate in a protest rally
on 10 December 2011, he was reportedly
anew detained and sentenced to 15 days administrative detention. On 11 December 2011, he was again taken
to the hospital but the police reportedly put pressure on the doctors to discharge
him. The next day, on 12 December 2011, he was brought
back to the detention centre located on Simferopolskiy
Boulevard.
According to the same
information, from 14 December 2011 to date, Mr. Sergey Udalzov has been taken several
times to the hospital but, because of the pressure exerted by officers from the
Department to Combat Extremism and the Federal Security Service (FSB) on the
doctors, he has not been properly examined and has not received adequate
medical assistance despite his condition. OMCT fears that the security forces are denying him access to adequate
medical examination and treatment in order to sanction him. OMCT recalls that such actions violate Russia’s
obligations under international human rights law and OMCT therefore urges the
competent Russian authorities to allow without any interference medical
treatment of Mr. Sergey Udalzov. The competent Russian authorities must ensure
that all detainees have full acces to medical treatment by independent
professionals and are treated humanly in accordance with, iner alia, the UN
Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any Form of
Detention or Imprisonment. 
. 
Furthermore, OMCT is concerned that Mr. Sergey Udalzov has been detained solely for exercising his
rights to freedom of expression and of association. OMCT condemns the use of
administrative detention to detain persons exercising their right to freedom of
expression. 
Actions requested
Please write to the authorities of the Russian Federation urging them to:
i.                    
Guarantee, in all
circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Sergey Udalzov and of his family;
ii.                  
Guarantee that he is
promptly examined by independent doctors and receives adequate and free medical
care, in accordance with, inter alia, the UN Body of Principles for the
Protection of All Persons under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment;
iii.                 
Order his immediate release in the absence
of valid legal charges and judicial process consistent with international
legal standards, or if such charges exist, bring him
before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights
at all times; 
iv.                
Carry out a prompt,
effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into these events,
in particular the arbitrary arrest and the denial to grant him adequate medical
examination and treatment, the result of which must be made public, in order to
bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal
and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;
v.                  
Ensure that adequate, effective and prompt reparation,
including adequate compensation and rehabilitation, is granted to the victim
concerned; 
vi.                
Guarantee
the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country
in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
ØPresident of the Russian Federation, Dmitry
Anatolyevich Medvedev, Kremlin, Moscow, Russia, Fax:+ 7 495 206
5173 / 230 2408, Email: president@gov.ru;
ØProsecutor General of the Russian
Federation, Yuri
Chayka, 125993, Moskva K-31, Ul. B. Dimitrovka,
d 15a, Russian Federation, Fax: + 7
(495)692-17-25; 
ØChairman of the Presidential
Human Rights Commission of the Russian Federation, Mikhail Fedotov,
103132 g. Moskva, Staraya ploshchad, d 8/5,pod 3, Russian Federation, Fax: +7
495 20 64 855; 
ØRussian Federal
Ombudsman for Human Rights, Vladimir Lukin, Fax: +7
495 207-74-70;
ØMinister of Internal
Affairs, Rashid Nurgaliev, ul. Zhitnaya, 16, 117049 Moscow, Russian
Federation, Telegram: Rossiia, 117049,
Moskva, Fax: + 7 495 237 49 25; 
ØPermanent Mission of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations in Geneva Av. de la Paix 15, CH-1211,
Geneva 20, Switzerland, E-mail : mission.russian@ties.itu.int, fax: +41 22 734
40 44; 
Please also write
to the embassies of the Russian Federation in your respective country.
*******
Geneva, 20 December 2011
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply. 