Iran:  Sentencing of Mr. Hadi Esmaeilzadeh to a total of four years of imprisonment
July  3, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2014 / JulyIran: Sentencing of Mr. Hadi Esmaeilzadeh to a total of four years of imprisonment​













New information
IRN 002 / 0414 / OBS 027.1
Judicial harassment / Sentencing / 
Reprisal for cooperating
with the UN
Iran
July 3, 2014
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), has received new information and requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in the
Iran.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been
informed by the Defenders of Human Rights Centre (DHRC) of the sentencing of
Mr. Hadi Esmaeilzadeh, a human rights lawyer and member of the DHRC. 
 
According to the
information received, Mr. Hadi Esmaeilzadeh was recently informed of his
sentencing on May 31, 2014 by Branch 15 of the Islamic Revolution Court to a
total of four years of imprisonment, including three years for the charge of
“assembly and collusion with intent to commit anti-security crimes” based on
membership of “an illegal organisation” – i.e. the DHRC – and one year for
“spreading propaganda against the State.” In addition, the court banned him
from practising as a lawyer and membership of political groups and parties for
two years. Mr. Hadi Esmaeilzadeh is appealing the sentence and remains free in
the meantime.
 
The Observatory recalls
that Messrs. Abdolfattah Soltani and Mohammad Seifzadeh,
two other human rights lawyers and co-founders of the DHRC, are currently
serving long-term prison sentences in Tehran's Evin prison and Karaj’s
Rajaishahr prison, respectively, on charges related to their human rights
activities. In January 2013, the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention declared that Mr. Soltani's detention was arbitrary. Mr. Soltani
suffers from serious health problems but does not have adequate access to
proper medical care in detention or outside medical facilities. 
 
The Observatory expresses its deep concern with
the ongoing judicial harassment against Mr. Esmaeilzadeh
and other DHRC members, and calls on the
Iranian authorities to end all kinds of harassment against him, including at
the judicial level and to drop all the charges against him. 
 
Background
information:
 
On April 15, 2014, Mr. Hadi Esmaeilzadeh was tried
by Branch 15 of the Islamic Revolution Court. During a preliminary
interrogation on July 12, 2011, he was notified of the charges of “assembly and
collusion with intent to commit anti-security crimes” based on his membership
of DHRC, and “spreading propaganda against the State”, for allegedly writing
the monthly reports of the DHRC and sending them to human rights organisations
including the UN Human Rights Council, as well as his activity in the Fair,
Healthy and Free Elections Committee and the Committee’s statement before the
2009 presidential elections. He was also banned from travelling abroad. He was
not allowed to read his file before the trial, but his lawyers were given the
opportunity to read it. The judge told him after the trial that if he wished
the ban on his travel abroad to be lifted, he had to “negotiate with the file
experts”, his interrogators at the Ministry of Intelligence who prepared the
file for the court. 
 
The
Observatory recalls that since the closure of the DHRC’s offices in 2008, Mr. Hadi Esmaeilzadeh has
faced several interrogations by intelligence and
security organisations as well as pressures to resign from the DHRC. He was
also expelled from the Higher Institute of Banking of Iran in 2009 and from the
Islamic Azad University-Bam Unit in 2012 because he refused to resign from the
DHRC. He served six years in prison from 1982-1988.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please
write to the Iranian authorities and ask them to:
 
i. Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Hadi Esmaeilzadeh
as well as of all human rights defenders in Iran;
 
ii. Release immediately and unconditionally Messrs. Abdolfattah
Soltani and Mohammad Seifzadeh and all human rights defenders detained in Iran merely to sanction their
human rights activities;
 
iii. Put
an end to any kind of harassment - including at the judicial level - against Messrs. Hadi
Esmaeilzadeh, Abdolfattah Soltani and Mohammad Seifzadeh, as well as all other
DHRC members and all human rights defenders in Iran and
ensure in all circumstances that they can carry out their activities without
any hindrances;
 
iv. Conform
in all circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly,
in particular:
- its article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually
or in association with others, to promote the protection and realization of
human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international
levels”, 
- and its article 12.2 which provides that “the State shall take all
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence,
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise
of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”;  
 
v. Ensure
in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Iran. 
 
Addresses:

· Leader of the
Islamic Republic, His Excellency Ayatollah Sayed Ali Khamenei, The Office of
the Supreme Leader, Shahid Keshvardoost St., Jomhuri Eslami Ave., Tehran,
Islamic Republic of Iran, Faxes: + 98 21 649 5880 / 21 774 2228, Email: info_leader@leader.ir; Twitter:
@khamenei_ir
· President Hassan
Rouhani, the Presidency, Palestine Avenue, Azerbaijan Intersection, Tehran,
Islamic Republic of Iran, Tel: +98 21 64451; Fax: + 98 21 649 5880; Email: media@rouhani.ir; Twitter: @HassanRouhani (English) and @Rouhani_ir (Persian). 
· Head of the
Judiciary, His Excellency Ayatollah Sadeq Larijani, Office of the Head of the
Judiciary, Pasteur Street, Vali Asr Avenue, south of Serah-e Jomhuri, Tehran,
Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: +98 21 879 6671 / +98 21 3 311 6567, Email: info@dadiran.ir; / info@dadgostary-tehran.ir / info@bia-judiciary.ir
· Minister of
Foreign Affairs, Mohammad Javad Zarif, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Sheikh
Abdolmajid Kushk-e Mesri Av, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax:
+98-21-66743149; matbuat@mfa.gov.ir
· Secretary
General, High Council for Human Rights, Mr. Mohammed Javad Larijani, [Care of]
Office of the Head of the Judicary, Pasteur St, Vali Asr Ave, South of Serah-e
Jomhouri, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Email: info@humanrights-iran.ir
· H.E.
Mr. Mohsen Naziri Asl, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Chemin du Petit-Saconnex 28, 1209 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22
7330203, Email: mission.iran@ties.itu.int
· H.E. Mr. Mahmoud
Barimani, Ambassador, Embassy of Iran in Brussels, 15 a avenue Franklin Roosevelt, 1050 Bruxelles, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 762
39 15. Email: secreteriat@iranembassy.be 
 
Please also write to
diplomatic representations of Iran in your respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva,
July 3, 2014
 
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.  
 
To contact the Observatory,
call the emergency line: 
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1
     43 55 18 80 Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / +
     41 22 809 49 29 