Thailand:  Thailand: 34 Burmese pro-democracy activists have been arrested and risk deportation
August 23, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2002 / AugustThailand: Thailand: 34 Burmese pro-democracy activists have been arrested and risk deportationUPDATE: news just in indicates that the Thai Government has announced that it intends to deport the Burmese political activists that are the subject of the appeal found below. It is also feared that further arrests and potentially deportations of activists and dissidents are likely to follow, during the build up to the Thai-Burmese talks next month. Several activists have reportedly already returned in secret to Burma, where they face capture, torture and even death.   Thank you for your continuing support.   Case THA 230802 Risk of Deportation / Risk of Torture  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Thailand.  Brief description of the situation:  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC), a member of the OMCT network, that 34 Burmese nationals, including members of pro-democracy groups, were arrested at the Thai-Burmese border at Sankhlaburi, in Kanchanaburi province, Thailand, on August 20th 2002.  According to the information received, the 34 Burmese persons were arrested by the Thai Police and have been charged with illegal entry. The detainees were taking refuge from the State Peace and Development Council (SPDC), the ruling military Government in Burma (Myanmar), as they risk being tortured and possibly killed for their political activities if they remained in Burma. The detainees are currently being held in the remote town of Sankhlaburi. The Thai Police claim they have arrested 31 Burmese, although our sources believed that as many as 34 Burmese were arrested during these events.  The names of the detainees and their affiliation are the following:   ·	Regional Representative Aung Kyaw Soe; Thien Lwin; Wunna - Democratic Party for a New Society (DPNS);  ·	35-year old Regional Representative Aung San Nyunt; 44-year old Zaw Weik, 26-year old Ms. Nan Nay Chi (who was separated from her one-year old child during her arrest) - National League for Democracy-Liberated Area (NLD LA); ·	Deputy Regional Representative Thien Lwin, Librarian Mr. and Mrs. Htet Khaing, Ms. Khin Moe Way, Mem Thet San - All Burma Student's Democratic Front (ABSDF);  ·	Ms. Mi Li Tanyar Mon, Nai Mon Kyai Hlang - Mon Youth Progressive Organisation (MYPO),   ·	Aung Htoo - People's Democratic Front (PDF)  ·	Ms. Naw Kha Yu - Karen National Union (KNU) ·	and 20 persons, reportedly including several children, who are members of the Bible Class of the Baptist Church.   According to the report, at least three of the activists were in possession of UNHCR cards. Most of the activists have reportedly been working openly for several years from Thailand in order to promote democracy and reconciliation in Burma, with the full knowledge of the Thai police and immigration department.   According to the information received, the Burmese Embassy in Bangkok has already called the police station in Sankhlburi in search of the identity of the NLD members.  According to the information received, if the detainees are deported or simply forced across the border, upon entry in Burma, they will be handed over to the SPDC troops, and consequently will be detained and face a high risk of being tortured and even killed.   According to the report, talks between the Thai and Burmese Governments are scheduled for next month, with the issue of the re-opening of the Thai-Burmese border thought to be high up on the agenda. It is believed that the crackdown on Burmese immigrants by the Thai police is related to these upcoming talks and preconditions being imposed by Burma as part of the negotiations.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of the afore-mentioned pro-democracy activists and others - notably any children in the group - that have been arrested and now face deportation to Burma. OMCT calls upon the authorities in Thailand to comply with their obligations under customary international law and ensure that the detainees are not deported or forced across the border, as they run a grave risk of being detained, tortured and potentially even killed by the authorities in Burma.   Action requested:  Please write to the authorities in Thailand urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned persons, order their immediate release and ensure that those who wish to apply for asylum in Thailand be allowed to do so, in accordance with the customary law provisions concerning the principle of non-refoulement;  ii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses ·	H.E. Thaksin Shinwatra, Prime Minister, Government house, Pitsanulok Road, Dusit District, Bangkok 10300, THAILAND, Fax: +662 282 8631  ·	H.E. Purachai Piumsombun, Minister of the Interior, Ministry of the Interior, Thanon Atsadang, Bangkok 10200, THAILAND, Fax: +662 226 4371  ·	Professor Saneh Chamrik, Chairman, c/o Mr. Vasan Phanich, National Human Rights Commission, 422 Phyathai Road, Patumwan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand. Fax: +662 219 2960, e-mail: (c/o)  pairit_s@yahoo.com  Please also write to the embassies of Thailand in your respective country.  Geneva, August 23rd, 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 