India:  Excessive use of force / arbitrary detention of peaceful protesters in Manipur
September 28, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent Interventions / India / 2018 / SeptemberIndia: Excessive use of force / arbitrary detention of peaceful protesters in Manipur
CASE IND
270918
Excessive
use of force / Arbitrary detention
The International Secretariat
of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT
intervention in the following situation in India.

Description of the Situation: 
The OMCT International
Secretariat has been informed by reliable sources of the use of excessive force
by law enforcement agents against peaceful protesters in Manipur, and of the
arbitrary arrest of at least 89 students and six professors from the Manipur
University. 
According to the information
received, on the morning of 21 September 2018 a large number of security forces
from
the Manipur Police Commando, the Manipur Civil Police, the Central Reserved
Police Force, the Indian Reserved Battalion and the Manipur Rifles raided without a warrant several
students’ hostels and professors’ quarters at Manipur University, allegedly in
search of Manipur University Students’ Union (MUSU)’s leaders. The search was
characterised by the destruction of hostels’ properties such as doors and
windows, as well as by the use of excessive force against the students. It was
reported that tear gas, mock bombs and even live bullets were used by the law
enforcement agents in different occasions during the operations, which
continued until dawn. It was also reported that security forces tried to plant
incriminating evidence, such as a gun, on the bed of a MUSU councillor and that
students who sustained injuries were not allowed to seek medical attention or
buy medicine until 2pm the following day, when an ambulance was finally allowed
on campus. Since the morning of 21 September 2018, all mobile internet
connections have been shut down. 
This raid took place in the
framework of three-month long protests by the students, teachers and staffs of
Manipur University, who were expressing their dissatisfaction with the
appointment of Prof. Adya Prasad Pandey as Vice Chancellors (VC) of the Manipur
University. Prof. Adya Prasad Pandey was subsequently dismissed, however the
controversial designation of Prof. Jugindro as Prof. Pandey’s successor, triggered
further protests by the students. As a consequence, Prof. Jugindro filed a
First Information Report (FIR) under the Indian Penal Code and the Criminal Law
Amendment Act, 2013 at the Singjamei police station, claiming that he had been
harassed by the students. The security forces raided the University in
pursuance of the above-mentioned FIR. 
During the raid, at least 89
students were arbitrarily detained in different police stations and, as of 28
September 2018, six professors, namely Professor Sougaijam Dorendrajit, Professor L. Vishwanath Sharma, Professor L. Sanju Kumar, Professor Chungkham
Yashowanta, Professor N. Sanatomba
and Professor Yengkhom Raghumani, as
well as seven students, Mr. L. Peter,
Mr. M. Santosh, Mr. Kh. Sushilkumar, Mr. L. Reynold, Mr. P. Romarjit, Mr. Kh.
Joychand and Mr. Ngamkholen Mate,
remain in judicial custody. A further two students, Mr. Laishram Robindro and Mr. Irom
Kennedy, are in police custody. Their hearing is scheduled for the 6th
of October 2018.
The OMCT condemns the arbitrary
detention of the above-mentioned individuals and urges the Indian authorities
to guarantee their safety and their psychological and physical integrity at all
times. 
The
OMCT further urges the Indian authorities to immediately and unconditionally release
the above-mentioned individuals, as well as to conduct prompt, effective, thorough, independent and
impartial investigated into the use of excessive force by security forces
during the events occurred at Manipur University on 21 October 2018. 
Actions requested: 
Please write to the Indian
authorities, urging them to: 
      
i.        
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned
individuals currently in detention; 
    
ii.        
Immediately and unconditionally release the individuals
currently in detention; 
   
iii.        
Carry out immediate, thorough, impartial, and
transparent investigations into the events described above in the Manipur State
of India in order to identify all those responsible and hold them accountable before
a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or
administrative sanctions as provided by law;
    iv.        
Ensure that
adequate, effective and prompt reparation, including adequate compensation and
rehabilitation, is granted to the victims for the violation of their human
rights;
    
v.        
Conduct human rights trainings for the police and security
forces; 
   
vi.        
Ensure the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms
throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human
rights standards ratified by India, including the right to freedom of expression.
Addresses: 
·       Mr. Shri Narendra
Damodardas Modi, Prime Minister of India, Fax: + 91 11 2301 6857. E-mail: pmosb@pmo.nic.in / manmo@sansad.in

·       Mr. Raj Nath Singh,
Union Minister of Home Affairs of India, Fax: +91 11 2309 2979. Email: dirfcra-mha@gov.in
·       Mr. Rajiv Gauba,
Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs of India, Email: hshso@nic.in
·       Justice Dipak Misra, Chief Justice of India,
Supreme Court, of India, Fax: +91 11 233 83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.in
·       Justice Shri H.L. Dattu, Chairperson of the National
Human Rights Commission of India, Fax +91 11 2465 1329. Email: chairnhrc@nic.in
·       Mr. Khaleel
Ahmad, Focal Point on Human Rights Defenders, National Human Rights Commission
of India, Email: hrd-nhrc@nic.in
·       H.E. Mr. Rajiv
Kumar Chander, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of India to the United
Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 906 86 96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
·       H.E. MS. Gaitri
Issar Kumar, Embassy of India to the European Union, Belgium and Luxembourg in
Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 6489638 / +32 2 6451869
Please also write
to the diplomatic representations of India in your respective countries.
***
Geneva, 28 September 2018 