Cambodia:  Joint Press Release: Civil society launches #FreeThe5KH campaign in support of the imprisoned ADHOC staff and NEC official
August  8, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2016 / AugustCambodia: Joint Press Release: Civil society launches #FreeThe5KH campaign in support of the imprisoned ADHOC staff and NEC officialPhnom Penh, 8 August 2016


		 

		We, the undersigned civil society organizations and non-governmental 
organizations, launch today – 8 August 2016 – the #FreeThe5KH 
campaign in support of the five human rights defenders, who are currently in 
pre-trial detention and under judicial investigation for allegations of 
bribery. The five face charges in regard to providing advice and legitimate 
reimbursement of food and transport costs to the woman alleged to have had 
an extra-marital relationship with the deputy opposition leader, Kem Sokha. 
The charges have all the hallmarks of being politically motivated, amounting 
to legal harassment. The five rights defenders have now spent over 
100 days in prison (102 days as of today).  

		As part of the campaign, we call on all concerned citizens to send 
messages of solidarity to the five rights defenders via postcards, which we 
will collect and deliver to the detainees until they are released. In 
addition, to raise awareness of their continued detention we will release 
periodically a series of infographics on our Facebook page and Twitter with 
the hashtag #FreeThe5KH. This campaign will complement already existing 
advocacy efforts taken on a local, regional and international level. To find 
out more about the campaign and how to get involved, please visit www.freethe5kh.net.

		 

		The five human rights defenders – four senior staff members from the 
Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association (ADHOC), Mr. Ny Sokha, 
Mr. Yi Soksan, Mr. Nay Vanda, and Ms. Lim Mony, and deputy secretary-general 
of the National Election Committee (and former ADHOC staff member) Mr. Ny 
Chakrya – were detained on 28 April 2016. On 2 May, the four ADHOC 
staff were charged with bribing a witness, and Mr. Ny Chakrya was charged as 
an accomplice to the same crime. United Nations (UN) staffer Mr. Soen Sally 
was also charged as an accomplice; however, he remains free due to his 
immunity as a UN official. That same day, Mr. Ny Chakrya was transferred to 
Police Judiciare and the four ADHOC staff were transferred to Phnom 
Penh’s Prey Sar prison. The Appeal Court denied the detainees bail on 
13 June. A final appeal against the bail decisions is pending before the 
Supreme Court.

		 

		The #FreeThe5KH campaign aims to garner support for the five detained 
human rights defenders, to remind them that the public has not forgotten 
about their cause and to help keep their morale high while they remain in 
detention.
 
		  

		This joint press release (also available in Khmer) is endorsed by:

		1.Action Aid Cambodia  

		2.Alliance for Conflict Transformation (ACT)  

		3.Amnesty International  

		4.Asia Democracy Network (ADN)  

		5.Asian Forum for Human Rights and Development (FORUM-ASIA)  

		6.ASEAN Parliamentarians for Human Rights (APHR)  

		7.Bandanh Chaktomuk Community  

		8.Boat People SOS  

		9.Burma Partnership  

		10.           Boeung Kak 
Community  

		11.           Boeung 
Trabek Community  

		12.           Borei 
Keila Community  

		13.           CamASEAN 
Youth’s Future  

		14.           Cambodia 
Indigenous Youth Association (CIYA)  

		15.           Cambodia 
Volunteers for Society (CVS)  

		16.           Cambodian 
Center for Human Rights (CCHR)  

		17.           Cambodian 
Human Rights Action Coalition (CHRAC)  

		18.           Cambodian 
Women’s Development Agency (CWDA)  

		19.           Cambodian 
Youth Network (CYN)  

		20.           Cambodian 
Independent Teacher Association (CITA)  

		21.           Civil 
Rights Defenders  

		22.           Coalition 
for Integrity and Social Accountability (CISA)  

		23.           Coalition 
of Cambodian Farmers Community (CCFC)  

		24.           Committee 
for Free and Fair Elections in Cambodia (COMFREL)  

		25.           Community 
Legal Education Center (CLEC)  

		26.           
Cooperation Committee for Cambodia (CCC)  

		27.           Equitable 
Cambodia (EC)  

		28.           Former 
Boeung Kak Women Network Community  

		29.           Front Line 
Defenders  

		30.           Gender and 
Development for Cambodia (GADC)  

		31.           Heinrich 
Böll Stiftung/Foundation  

		32.           Housing 
Rights Task Force (HRTF)  

		33.           Human 
Rights Watch  

		34.           
Independent Democracy of Informal Economy Association (IDEA)  

		35.           Indigenous 
Youth at Prome Commune, Preah Vihear Province  

		36.           Indradevi 
Association  

		37.           
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), in the framework of the 
Observatory for  the Protection of Human Rights Defenders  

		38.           Kuoy 
Ethnic Community at Prame Commune, Preah Vihear Province  

		39.           Land 
Conflict Community, Krous Village, Battambang Province  

		40.           Land 
Conflict Community, Skun Village, Siem Reap Province  

		41.           Land 
Community, Prek Chik Village, Koh Kong Province  

		42.           Land 
Community, Village I, Sangkat III, Preah Sihanouk Province  

		43.           Lor Peang 
Community, Kampong Chhnang Province  

		44.           Phnom Bat 
Community  

		45.           Ponlok 
Khmer  

		46.           Railway 
Station, Tuol Sangkae A Community  

		47.           SOS 
International Airport Community  

		48.           Southeast 
Asian Press Alliance (SEAPA)  

		49.           Star 
Kampuchea  

		50.           Strey 
Khmer Organization  

		51.           
UnionAidAbroad-APHEDA  

		52.           World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), in the framework of the Observatory for 
the  Protection of Human Rights Defenders 