Thailand:  Thailand: massacre of at least 17 Burmese migrant workers goes unpunished
March 21, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2002 / MarchThailand: Thailand: massacre of at least 17 Burmese migrant workers goes unpunishedCase THA 210302 Massacre/Impunity  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Thailand.  Brief description of the situation:  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC), of the massacre of at least 17 people from Burma during the latter stages of January 2002, in the Mae Ramat district, Tak province, Thailand.  According to the information received, during the last week of January 2002, villagers from Wangpha, Mae Ramat district, found 14 corpses in the Mae Lamao stream, of both female and male persons aged between 14 and 45, bearing stab wounds on their bodies and necks. The bodies were discovered in two groups of seven, they had been stripped naked and their hands were tied behind their backs. After reporting this incident to the local police, the village head was reportedly told to dispose of the bodies in the river, which the villagers later did, with the bodies expected to then travel downstream into the Moei River at the Thai-Burmese border. The police were reportedly unaware of the number of deaths involved in this case and considered it to be another case of so-called “normal” killing of Burmese people. According to the report, after news of this incident spread, the provincial police chief ordered the local police to recover the bodies. Seven bodies where found in the Moei River on February 2nd, 2002. The police claim autopsies were then conducted upon them, but reports indicate that the bodies were instead immediately cremated in the area in which they had been found.   According to the information received, on February 4th, 2002, three more bodies were discovered and then sent for to be autopsied at the Mae Set hospital. The autopsy reportedly only revealed that the victims were of Burmese origin and that they had been killed shortly before being discovered. The certified number of victims of the massacre stands at 17, although reliable sources indicate that four more bodies were found in a different nearby stream, bringing the total to 21. Their identities remain unknown at this time.  According to the report, the victims apparently belonged to the thousands of migrant workers that cross the border into Thailand illegally from neighbouring countries like Burma. Mae Sot is the largest entry point for these people, and is a dangerous area for the Burmese, who are reportedly subjected to various types of human rights violations, including extortions, assaults, rape and murder. Reports indicate that four to five Burmese persons are killed every week in this region. The police are generally thought to be aware of these violations and are even allegedly active participants of abuses against Burmese migrants. Furthermore, offences are reportedly frequently ignored by the police, if they do not involve Thai victims.  According to the information received, reports on these events and information concerning police investigations have been insufficient and unclear, with the authorities exhibiting great reluctance in addressing these issues. The Thai authorities appear to have concentrated on emphasising that the victims were not Thai, rather than taking in action in order for the perpetrators of the massacre to be brought to justice.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned about the violations of human rights committed against the migrant Burmese worker population in Thailand, in particular against the victims of this massacre, and the Thai authorities’ disregard for these offences, which leads to the impunity of the perpetrators of these acts, some of which are believed to be members of the police.   Action requested:  Please write to the authorities in Thailand urging them to:  i.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events and guarantee that those responsible are brought to trial and that the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions are applied as provided by law; ii.	guarantee adequate reparation to the families of the victims of the massacre; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	Prime Minister Chuan Leekpai, Government House, Pitsanulok Road, Dusit District, Bangkok 10300, Thailand. Fax: +66 2 282 8631, Email: govspkman@mozart.inet.co.th  ·	HE Purachai Piumsombun, Ministry of the Interior, Thanon Atsadang, Bangkok 10200, Thailand. Fax: +66 2 226-4371 e-mail webteam@moi.go.th  ·	Professor Saneh Chamrik, Chairman, c/o Mr. Vasan Phanich, National Human Rights Commission, 422 Phyathai Road, Patumwan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand. Fax: +662 219-2966 e-mail: c/o pairit_s@yahoo.com  Please also write to the embassies of Thailand in your respective country.  Geneva, March 21st, 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 