Sri Lanka: extra-judicial execution of a 22-year-old man
March  3, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sri Lanka / 2004 / MarchSri Lanka: Sri Lanka: extra-judicial execution of a 22-year-old manCase LKA 030304 Extra-judicial execution   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sri Lanka.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Asian Human Rights  Commission (AHRC), a member of the OMCT network, of the extra-judicial execution of 22-year-old Mr. Bellanavithanage Sanath Yasaratne in Sri Lanka.  According to the information received, 22-year-old Mr. Bellanavithanage Sanath Yasaratne from Gorakagahagodella, Bellana, Agalawatte, was reportedly assaulted and shot by the police from the Baduraliya Police Station on February 22nd, 2004. He died while being transferred from Wattaewa Hospital to the general hospital in Colombo on the same day. According to the Judicial Medical Officer (JMO), who conducted a post-mortem inquiry, the victim died as a result of gun shot injuries.  According to the information received, Mr. Bellanavithanage Sanath Yasaratne was involved in a quarrel between some of his family members at his sister’s house. A complaint was made about the quarrel and four police officers, led by Sub Inspector (S.I.) Dammika, then came to the house to investigate this, but no-one was there. While returning to the police station, they recognised Mr. Bellanavithanage Sanath Yasaratne and began to question him about the incident. One of the officers, reportedly P.C. Suriyyarachi, began beating the victim with a baton during the interrogation, which caused the victim to attempt to run away. A witness to the incident has stated that one of the other officers then fired two shots at the victim, who fell to the floor. The police abandoned the victim, doing nothing to help him. Later, the victim's brother and several other people took the victim to the Wattaewa Hospital. However, the victim died while being transferred to the general hospital in Colombo for an operation.  A post-mortem inquiry has been conducted by the Judicial Medical Officer (JMO) of  Nagoda Hospital, who confirmed that the death of the victim was due to gun shot injuries. An official legal inquiry has, however, not yet been held.   The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned by the extra-judicial execution of Mr. Bellanavithanage Sanath Yasaratne. OMCT calls on the Sri Lankan authorities to immediately launch a thorough and impartial investigation into these events, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to justice, and award adequate reparation to the family of the victim. It is vital that the alleged perpetrators are suspended from police service while the investigation is ongoing.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Sri Lanka urging them to:  i.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; ii.	guarantee that adequate reparation is provided to the family of the victim; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	Hon. Mr. Ranil Wickremasinghe, Prime Minister, Cambridge Place, Colombo 7, SRI LANKA, Fax: +94 11 2 682905 / 575454, E-mail: secpm@sltnet.lk ·	Hon. Mr. K. C. Kamalasabesan, Attorney General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12, SRI LANKA, Fax: +94 11 2 436 421, Email: attorney@sri.lanka.net or counsel@sri.lanka.net ·	Mr. Ranjith Abeysuriya PC, Chairman National Police Commission, 69-1 Ward Place, Colombo 7, Sri Lanka, Fax: +94 11 2 669 128 (need to ask to change to fax mode) / 691 926  ·	Dr. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Director, National Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka,  ·	No. 36, Kynsey Road, Colombo 8, SRI LANKA, Fax: +94 11 2 694 924 / 696 470, E-mail: sechrc@sltnet.lk ·	Ambassador Prasad Kariyawasam, Rue de Moillebeau 56 (5ème) - CP 436, CH-1211, Genève 19, Suisse, E-mail: mission.srilanka@ties.itu.int, Fax: +4122 734 90 84  Please also write to the embassies of Sri Lanka in your respective country.  Geneva, March 3rd, 2004  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 