Egypt:  Asset freeze of El Nadeem Center for the Rehabilitation for Victims of Violence and Torture
November 17, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2016 / NovemberEgypt: Asset freeze of El Nadeem Center for the Rehabilitation for Victims of Violence and Torture

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 


 
New information
EGY 001 / 0216 / OBS 019.3
Harassment / Asset freeze /
Restrictions to freedom of association
Egypt
November 17, 2016
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a partnership of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and
FIDH, has received new information and requests your urgent intervention in the
following situation in Egypt.
New information:
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the asset
freeze of El Nadeem Center for the Rehabilitation for Victims of Violence and
Torture (“El Nadeem Center”)[1],based in Cairo.
According to the information received, on November 10, 2016, El Nadeem
Center was informed that their assets had been frozen, following a directive of
the Central Bank of Egypt (CBE). Several other NGOs have been allegedly
subjected to the same administrative measure. The reason to justify the asset
freeze is the non-compliance of El Nadeem Center with Law 84/2002 (the NGO law). El Nadeem Center does not have yet the possibility to take legal
action as they are still waiting for an official notification from the CBE. 
The Observatory would like to recall that El Nadeem Center was not part
of case 173/2011 (the “foreign funding case” against civil society), within
which framework on September 17, 2016, several human rights defenders and NGOs
were subjected to an asset freeze[2].

It has also to be recalled that, overthe past months El-Nadeem Center
has been subjected to closure threats and this new development constitute a
further attempt to undermine its legitimate human rights work (see background
information). 
Moreover, the Observatory recalls that the decision to freeze El Nadeem
Center’s assets comes at a time of rising government pressure on independent
human rights groups in Egypt, in the context of a dramatic deterioration of the
human rights situation in the country, marked namely by a massive crackdown on
civil society and a notable increase in cases of torture, deaths in detention
and enforced disappearances.
The
Observatory urges the Egyptian authorities to immediately and unconditionally
put an end to all acts of harassment against El Nadeem Center and against all
human rights organisations in the country, and to comply with its constitutional
obligations (in particular Article 78 and Article 93 of the 2014 Egyptian
Constitution which respectively recognise the right to freedom of association
and Egypt’s compliance with international human rights conventions ratified by
Egypt) as well as its international legal obligations (in particular Article 22
of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights – ICCPR).
Background information:
On February 17, 2016 about 4 p.m. two police officers from the Azbakeyya
District authority and one city employee ordered the employees of El Nadeem
Center to leave the center's premises. The three men delivered an “administrative closure order” signed
by the Director of the Health Ministry’s
Free Treatment Directorate and addressed to the head of the Azbakeyya district
authority, referring to a violation of Law 453/1954[3].
The document ordered the closure of the center based on a decision signed on
February 8, 2016, “for breaching license
conditions” (providing no further
information) stamped by the Cairo district on February 15. The implementation
of the order was postponed until February 22, 2016.
At
the beginning of February, the center was
visited by an employee of the Ministry of Health, who came to inspect the
center based on an order given by phone from the Minister of Health himself.
The minister employee did not have any official papers nor an inspection
warrant. The employee of the Ministry ordered a copy of the center's license.
No breaches of regulations were noted. 
On February 21, 2016, Ms. Aida Seif al-Dawla, Director of El
Nadeem Center and Dr. Suzan Fayad, Founder of El Nadeem Center
accompanied by their lawyer Ms. Maha Yucef and the head of the Cairo's
doctor's syndicate Dr. Sanaa Fuad, held meetings with representatives of
the Ministry of Health to discuss about the “administrative closure order”
issued against El Nadeem Center on February 17, 2016, for allegedly “breaching
licence conditions”, without providing further information. On February 20,
2016, El Nadeem Center's lawyer filed an urgent motion to the Administrative
Court of First Instance to suspend the implementation of the closure order.
Meanwhile, the implementation of the order was postponed until February 22 upon
El Nadeem Center's request pending meetings at the MoH. 
During the meetings, El Nadeem Center's representatives were informed
that the MoH had ordered the closure of El Nadeem Center for violating its
license, referring to the conduct of activities which did not fall within the
mandate for which El Nadeem Center had been licensed. Such activities include
the publication of torture reports, which according to the Ministry is not
linked with rehabilitation and is not a medical activity, and especially, the
publication in January 2016 of a review of “2015 in numbers” in the Egyptian
newspaper Al-Masry Al-youm, summarizing cases of deaths, torture and
medical neglect in detention in 2015 as well as cases of extra judicial
killings reported in the media. However, during the meetings, no professional
or medical breaches were identified with regards to El Nadeem Center's
activities. 
El Nadeem Center's representatives
requested a moratorium and the suspension of the closure order pending an
agreement on ways to disengage their medical activities from their human rights
advocacy activities. The request was rejected. 
On February 20, 2016, El Nadeem
Center challenged the closure order before the Administrative Court. The
complaint included an urgent request to delay implementation of the closure
order until the Court has heard the appeal, but that urgent request was not
accepted. 
In the afternoon of April 5, 2016, the Egyptian Ministry of Health (MoH)
sent a delegation to El Nadeem Center to implement the administrative closure
order and close the Center. El Nadeem directors refused to comply and leave the
premises, as the MoH representatives did not present the original document of
the closure order, as required by law. 
The MoH representatives decided to leave the premises but called the
Interior Ministry (MoI) to request the intervention of police forces to enforce
the order. 
On
April 6, 2016, El Nadeem Center sent another
telegram to the Director in charge of non-governmental treatment institutions
and licences at the MOH stating that the closing team did not have an official
order with them, that the center was not inspected for any violations and that
they had not been informed of any violations to correct. The memorandum
requested, again, to suspend the closing order and to form a medical inspection
committee to inspect the clinic for any professional breaches. 
At
the same time, El Nadeem Center’s staff was informed via the media that the
Azbakeyya district Governorate had filed a complaint against them at the
Azbakeya police station for not allowing the closing team to execute the
closing order. 
Actions requested:
Please write to the authorities of Egypt asking them
to:
i. Immediately and unconditionally lift the asset
freeze against El Nadeem Center; 
ii. Put an end to all forms of harassment against El
Nadeem Center, as well as in general against all human rights organisations and
defenders in Egypt;
iii. Comply with all the provisions of the
United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular with its
Article 1 5(b) and 12.2;
iv. Ensure in all circumstances respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international
human rights standards and international instruments ratified by Egypt.
Addresses:
·     
President of the Arab
Republic of Egypt, H.E. Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt,
Fax: +202 23901998
·      Prime Minister, Mr. Sherif
Ismail, Magles El Shaab Street, Kasr El Aini Street, Cairo, Egypt. Fax: + 202
2735 6449 / 27958016. Email: primemin@idsc.gov.eg
·      Minister of the Interior, General Magdy Abdel Ghaffar, Ministry of the
Interior, El-Sheikh Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: moi1@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2579 2031 / 2794 5529
•      
Minister of Justice, Mr.
Ahmed Al-Zanad, Ministry of Justice, Magles El Saeb Street, Wezaret Al Adl,
Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2795 8103
•      
Public Prosecutor,
Counsellor Nabeel Sadek, Dar al-Qadha al-Ali, Ramses Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax:
+202 2577 4716
•      
Mr. Mohamed Fayeq,
President of the National Council For Human Rights, Fax: + 202 25747497 /
25747670. Email: nchr@nchr.org.eg
•      
H.E. Ms. Wafaa Bassim,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations in Geneva, 49
avenue Blanc, 1202 Genève, Switzerland,
Email: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41 22 738 44 15
•      
Embassy of Egypt in
Brussels, 19 avenue de l’Uruguay, 1000
Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 675.58.88; Email: embassy.egypt@skynet.be
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Egypt in
your respective country.



[1]                El Nadeem Center is
registered in Egypt since 1993 and has provided hundreds of torture victims
with vital services including counseling and legal assistance. The Center issues
monthly summaries of reported instances of torture, deaths, and medical
negligence in police custody. Many of the Center’s patients say they have been tortured by Egyptian
security forces. 

[2]                 For more information see the Observatory Urgent Appeal
EGY 004 / 0615 / OBS 049.7, of September 19, 2016


[3]                The law 453/1954
regulates industrial and commercial shops, however, not clinics. The law states
that “no business shop subject to this law can be set up or run
without the relevant license; no changes or amendment in such shops may be
executed without the approval of entity which issued such license.” 