Nepal: Deterioration of the human rights situation in the past two weeks
April 21, 2006
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2006 / AprilNepal: Nepal: Deterioration of the human rights situation in the past two weeksPRESS RELEASE NEPAL: OMCT calls upon the United Nations Security Council to take into consideration the deteriorating human rights situation in Nepal Geneva, 21 April 2006. The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) strongly condemns the disproportionate and excessive use of force by the Nepalese police and the Royal Nepalese Army that was witnessed over the last two weeks against public protests demanding throughout Nepal full democracy, and which has resulted in the killing of civilians, and the wounding and detention of numerous persons, in violation of the right to freedom of peaceful assembly.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned by reports from many Nepalese NGOs, including the Informal Sector Service Centre (INSEC), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture network, of the violent reaction of the Nepalese authorities and security forces to the peaceful nation-wide protests that were initiated by the Seven Party Alliance (SPA). This coalition of trade unions and political parties had called for a general strike from 6 to 9 April 2006. As of today, the demonstrations in which hundreds of thousands people have taken part still continue.  Although the police have often faced violent situations with demonstrators throwing stones and other projectiles to them, the use of force against the overall peaceful demonstrators is to be considered to be far out of proportion. Attacks by the national police and the Royal Nepalese Army (RNA) began as soon as the strike was called, on 4 April 2006. Within a couple of days, hundreds of people were taken to hospitals in Kathmandu only, after being injured by brutal acts of the police and the RNA. Members of the police and the Armed Police Force reportedly used excessive force against demonstrators as well as others not involved in demonstrations. For instance, police fired teargas, rubber and metal bullets into crowds of demonstrators and used lathi (long baton) charges, often aiming at the head and sometimes causing serious injury. Since 9 April 2006, anti-landmine tanks have been seen in the streets of Kathmandu and Kirtipur. Scores of bystanders and demonstrators, including women, children, journalists, lawyers and human rights defenders, were identified among the casualties. Moreover, several civilians were killed.  Furthermore, many people have been arrested in the course of the peaceful demonstrations. Two weeks after the demonstrations began, thousands of people have been arbitrarily arrested. Several hundreds continue to be detained under the Public Security Act (PSA), many without access to lawyers or their families. On 20 April 2006, estimations of the number of persons arrested were as high as 2,500 of which 800 were released. It is alleged that this number is far higher in reality as arbitrary arrests of civilians in the villages are still lacking documentation. Whereabouts of some of the persons arrested during the ongoing agitation remain also unknown. Resulting from these arrests of thousands of people, detention centres are overcrowded and detainees lack all basic needs such as clean water, food, and medical assistance.  Therefore, “it is time for the Government, and for all commanders of police and other security forces involved in policing demonstrations, to recognise that this level of violence against civilians is not acceptable and is against the obligations of the State”, as stated by Mr. Ian Martin, Representative of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, on 11 April 2006.  The International Secretariat of OMCT calls on the UN Security Council to put the human rights crisis in Nepal on its agenda, and impose targeted sanctions on the Nepalese authorities. It also urges the authorities to comply with the resolution that was adopted in April 2005 by the UN Commission on Human Rights, in which the Government of Nepal was urged to cease arbitrary arrests and extrajudicial executions, to stop the use of torture and ill-treatment, and to end impunity for human rights violations committed by members of the security forces.  In addition, as stressed out by Mr. Eric Sottas, OMCT Director: “In the last session of the Human Rights Commission in 2005, Nepal was already of major concern. Yet, it is now time that the position of the United Nations becomes stronger. Therefore, if this dramatic situation had to endure, it would be incumbent upon the UN Human Rights Council to address this situation as a first priority during its first session, which will start on 19 June 2006. The credibility of the Council is at stake as it would be a crucial opportunity to examine the further development of the human rights situation in the country”.  More generally, OMCT calls on the Nepalese authorities to guarantee the respect of the international human rights standards and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national law, international humanitarian law and human rights standards.   Geneva, 21 April 2006   Contact: OMCT: +41 22 809 49 39 