Nigeria:  Nigeria: violence against women protesting against the activities of Shell Petroleum and Chevron/Texaco
November 18, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Nigeria / 2002 / NovemberNigeria: Nigeria: violence against women protesting against the activities of Shell Petroleum and Chevron/TexacoCase NGA181102.VAW/ESCR  Violence against Women/Violations of Economic, Social and Cultural Rights Torture and ill treatment  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received information on the following situation in Nigeria.   Brief description of the Situation  The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) is deeply concerned by the events described in a petition filed on 5 November 2002 on behalf of women in the Niger Delta region who protested against Shell Petroleum Development Company (“SPDC”) and Chevron/Texaco Nigeria Limited.  According to information received from reliable sources, on 8 August 2002, women from the region, mainly Itsekiri, Ijaw and Ilaje women, peacefully protested against these two oil companies claiming environmental degradation as well as substandard employment and contractual policies. As a response to the protest, SPDC management called on Army and Navy forces to disperse the protest. The Army and Navy police reportedly intervened using tear gas and allegedly went on to beat and rape some of the women. The information received further notes that several pregnant women had miscarriages as a result of the beatings and that one woman’s breast was chopped off.    Many of the women were subsequently hospitalized.  In the meantime, they received no recognition from the SPDC or the government for the injuries they suffered at the hands of the police.  Mr. C.D.S. Oman Irabor, Chairman and National Coordinator of Human Rights Defender Organisation of Nigeria, filed a petition on 5 November 2002 on behalf of the injured women, requesting reparations for their hospital expenses and demanding greater accountability from multinational oil companies in Nigeria through the establishment of a mechanism whereby complaints about the conduct of these companies can be voiced in a peaceful manner without fear of violent response.     OMCT is deeply troubled by the violence committed by government forces against the women protestors and would like to recall that Nigeria is a party to several international human rights instruments that specifically prohibit violence against women including; the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Convention against Torture and the Convention for the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women.  OMCT is particularly concerned by the conduct of multinational corporations operating in Nigeria, immediately resorting to violent responses to peaceful protests.  The relationship between the Nigerian government and multinational oil companies operating there is one of long standing complicity, with government forces often responding to labor and environmental protests on behalf of the oil companies.  These military responses frequently result in violence, for which both the government and the oil companies must assume responsibility.  Action requested  Please write to the Nigerian authorities urging them to:  i.	guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the women involved in the protest on 8 August 2002; ii.	conduct an independent inquiry into the events surrounding the protest and apply the appropriate criminal, civil or administrative sanctions to any persons found to have engaged in acts of torture or ill-treatment;  iii.	ensure that the injured women receive adequate reparations for the injuries they have suffered;  iv.	establish an appropriate body to monitor the action of multinational oil companies operating in Nigeria and ensure that these companies respect the rule of law and the right of the people in the region to protest their activities;  v.	guarantee women their human rights, including their right to be free from discrimination and their right to be free from torture and inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment;  vi.	ensure in all circumstances the full respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with national and international standards.  Please write to Shell, urging it to:  i.	take all necessary measures to ensure that it abides by Principle 1 of the UN Global Compact to which it is a party and according to which Shell shall support and respect the protection of internationally proclaimed human rights within its sphere of influence;  ii.	take all necessary measures to ensure that it abides by Principle 2 of the UN Global Compact according to which Shell shall make sure that it is not complicit in human rights abuses;  Please write to Chevron/Texaco, urging it to:  i.	take all necessary measures to ensure that its activities do not lead to violations of human rights, as guaranteed by international human rights instruments;  ii.	take all necessary measures to ensure that it is not complicit in human rights abuses  Addresses:  His Excellency Olusegun Obasanjo, President of the Republic, The Presidency, Federal Secretariat   Phase II, Shehu Shagari Way,Abuja; Fax: 234 9 523 21 36 (press office),  Email: president.obasanjo@nigeriagov.org  Alhaji Sule Lamido, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Maputo Street , Zone 3 Wuse District, Abuja, Nigeria ; Fax: 234 9 523 02 08.  Kanu Godwin Agabi, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, New Federal Secretariat complex   Shehu Shagari Way, Abuja, Federal Capital Territory, Nigeria; Fax: 234 9 523 52 08.  Chevron/Texaco Corporation, 575 Market Street, San Francisco, CA 94105, USA  The Shell Petroleum Development Company of Nigeria, Exploration & Production, Private Mailbag 2418, Lagos, Nigeria; Fax: +234 1 2636864    The Embassy of Nigeria in your respective countries.   Geneva, 18 November 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 