Iran:  Arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of human rights defender Mohammad Seifzadeh continue
February 22, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2013 / FebruaryIran: Arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of human rights defender Mohammad Seifzadeh continue


THE OBSERVATORY - PRESS RELEASE

 
IRAN: Arbitrary
detention and judicial harassment 
of human rights defender
Mohammad Seifzadeh continue
 
Paris-Geneva, February 22, 2013. The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), condemns the continuing repression of human rights
defenders in Iran.
 
On February 20, 2013, Mr. Mohammad
Seifzadeh, a prominent human rights lawyer and founding
member of the Defenders of Human Rights Centre (DHRC), was notified by Branch 15 of the
Islamic Revolution Court of a new sentence of six years’ imprisonment in first
instance, for “assembly and collusion against national security”.
 
The Observatory recalls that on October 29, 2010, Mr. Seifzadeh was
sentenced to nine years’ imprisonment and ten years’ ban on practice as lawyer
by Branch 15 of the Revolutionary Court, on charges of “acting against national
security” through founding the DHRC, and “propaganda against the regime”
through interviews with foreign media. He was later arrested on April 23, 2011,
and has remained in detention since then. 
 
In
June 2011, Mr. Seifzadeh’s family was told that the Appeal Court had reduced
his prison sentence to two years. However, on September 13, 2011, he was summoned to
court and notified of a new charge of “propaganda against the system”. This is
believed to be connected to a letter he wrote from prison to former President
Khatami on July 21, 2011. In that letter, he had mentioned the widespread
breach of the law in the judiciary and stated that there was no solution but to
dissolve the illegal authorities such as the Islamic Revolution Courts and the
Special Clergy Court and to reform the judiciary’s structure.
 
The Observatory firmly
denounces the ongoing arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Mr.
Mohammad Seifzadeh, which only aim to sanction the legitimate exercise of his
human right activities. The Observatory is all the more concerned that Mr.
Seifzadeh suffers from health problems and requires medical treatment. On
February 6, 2013, he was transferred to an outside hospital for treatment of
his kidney, but was returned to prison soon after, on February 16.
 
Accordingly, the Observatory urges the Iranian
authorities to immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Seifzadeh and all
human rights defenders presently detained in the country, to put an end to any
kind of harassment against them and to guarantee in all circumstances their
physical and psychological integrity, in line with the United Nations
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and international human rights instruments ratified by Iran.

For
further information, please contact:
·       FIDH: Arthur Manet / Audrey Couprie: + 33 1 43 55 25 18
·     
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau:
+ 41 22 809 49 39 