Syrian Arab Republic:  Joint Statement: Rights groups condemn execution of human rights defender and software engineer Bassel Khartabil
August  2, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2017 / AugustSyrian Arab Republic: Joint Statement: Rights groups condemn execution of human rights defender and software engineer Bassel Khartabil Joint Statement Syria 02 August 2017 - ARABIC2 pages / 355 KB


02-August-2017
Syria: Rights groups condemn execution of human
rights defender and software engineer Bassel Khartabil

The
family of Bassel Khartabil, a Syrian-Palestinian software engineer and
free speech activist, confirmed that he had been subjected to an extrajudicial
execution in
October 2015. The undersigned human rights organisations condemn the
extrajudicial execution of Khartabil and call for an investigation into the
circumstances surrounding his death.
On 1
August 2017, Noura Ghazi Safadi, Khartabil’s wife, announced on Facebook that her husband has been killed. She wrote: “Words
are difficult to come by while I am about to announce, on behalf of Bassel's
family and mine, the confirmation of the death sentence and execution of my
husband Bassel Khartabil Safadi. He was executed just days after he was taken from
Adra prison in October 2015. This is the end that suits a hero like him.”
On 15 March 2012, Military
Intelligence arrested Bassel Khartabil and held incommunicado for eight months
before moving him to Adra prison in Damascus in December 2012. During this time
he was subjected to torture and other ill-treatment. He remained in Adra prison
until 3 October 2015, when he managed to inform his family that he was being
transferred to an undisclosed location. That was the last time his family heard
from him.
His family subsequently
received unconfirmed information that he may have been transferred to the
military-run field court inside the Military Police base in Qaboun in Damascus.
These courts are notorious for conducting closed-door proceedings that do not meet
minimum international standards for a fair trial. 
Before
his arrest, Bassel Khartabil used his technical expertise to help advance
freedom of speech and access to information via the internet. He has won many
awards, including the 2013 Index on Censorship Digital Freedom Award for using
technology to promote an open and free internet, and was named one of Foreign
Policy magazine’s Top 100 Global Thinkers of 2012 “for insisting, against all
odds, on a peaceful Syrian revolution.” 
Since his detention, human
rights groups at a national, regional and international level campaigned for
his immediate and unconditional release. On 21 April 2015, the United Nations
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention declared his detention a violation of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and called for his
release, yet the Syrian authorities still refused to free him.
The signatory organizations
express the deepest sorrow at the death of Bassel Khartabil and believe that
his arrest and subsequent execution are a direct result of his human rights
work and his efforts to promote freedom of speech and access to information. 
We urge the Syrian authorities
to:
·     
Immediately disclose the circumstances
of the execution of Bassel Khartabil;
·     
End extrajudicial executions,
enforced disappearance, arbitrary arrests, and torture and other ill-treatment;

·     
Release all detainees in Syria held for peacefully exercising
their legitimate rights to freedom of expression and association.



Signed:
1.    
Access
Now
2.    
Amnesty
International (AI)
3.    
Arab
Digital Expression Foundation (ADEF)
4.    
Arabic
Network for Human Rights Information (ANHRI)
5.    
Article
19
6.     Association for Progressive Communications (APC)
7.    
Cairo
Institute for Human Rights Studies (CIHRS)
8.    
CIVICUS: World Alliance for Citizen
Participation
9.    
Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF)
10. 
English
PEN
11. 
Euromed
Rights
12. 
Front
Line Defenders (FLD)
13. 
FIDH,
within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of
            Human Rights Defenders
14.  Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR)
15.  Hivos International
16. 
Index
on Censorship
17. 
Iraqi Network for Social Media (INSM)
18.  Lawyers' Rights Watch
Canada (LRWC)
19.  Maharat Foundation
20.  Metro Centre to Defend
Journalists in Iraqi Kurdistan
21.  Palestinian Center for
Development and Media Freedoms (MADA)
22. 
PAX
for Peace
23. 
PEN
International
24. 
Reporters
without Borders (RSF)
25. 
Sisters'
Arab Forum for Human Rights (SAF)
26.  SKeyes Center for Media
and Cultural Freedom
27.  Social
Media Exchange (SMEX)
28. 
Syrian
Centre for Democracy and Civil Rights
29. 
Syrian
Center For Legal Studies and Researches
30. 
Syrian
Center for Media and Freedom of Expression (SCM)
31. 
Syrians
for Truth and Justice (STJ)
32.  Syrian Network for Human Rights (SNHR)
33. 
Vigilance
for Democracy and the Civic State
34. 
World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the
           
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders 