Russian Federation:  Joint Press Release: Human rights defender Oyub Titiev convicted following unfair and absurd judicial process
March 18, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2019 / MarchRussian Federation: Joint Press Release: Human rights defender Oyub Titiev convicted following unfair and absurd judicial process
 
Geneva-Paris-Brussels,
March 18, 2019. Today a court in
Chechnya, Russia, sentenced human rights defender Oyub Titiev to four years in
prison on trumped-up charges after an unfair trial. Titiev and the human rights
NGO for which he was working - Memorial, have long been a thorn in the side of
the local authorities for their key role in documenting grave human rights
violations in Chechnya.
 
FIDH and OMCT, under the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, together with IPHR, unequivocally condemn
today’s conviction of Oyub Titiev by the Shali City Court for
“possession of marijuana on an especially large scale” (Article 228(2) of the
Russian Criminal Code).
 
The criminal proceedings against Mr. Titiev,
detained since his arrest on January 9, 2018, constitute a
mockery of justice and serve the sole purpose of humiliating and punishing
Titiev for his human rights activities. Today’s ruling, which was observed by
the Observatory and IPHR, also delivers a dire warning to other human rights
defenders either to remain silent or face the consequences.
 
“It is appalling how a local court could
sentence a high-profile defender in breach of every possible fair trial
standard, despite huge attention locally and internationally. One can only
imagine what does administration of justice look like in 'ordinary' cases that
attract no attention", said Brigitte Dufour, IPHR’s Director.​
Fabricated
charges and unfair trial
 
On July 9, 2018, Mr. Titiev’s trial started
before Judge Zainetdinova of the Shali City Court. At each court hearing Titiev
was seated in a metal cage in the middle of the court room, a practice which
the European Court of Human Rights has repeatedly condemned as constituting
inhuman and degrading treatment.
 
Titiev’s trial was replete with violations of fair trial standards.
Prior to the trial’s start, Chechnya’s leader, Ramzan Kadyrov, publicly claimed
that Titiev is a drug user, thereby violating the presumption of innocence of
the accused. During the eight months long trial, Judge Zainetdinova refused
defense’s repeated motions to compel an investigation into well-substantiated
allegations that marijuana was planted in Titiev’s car. Indeed, the judge
denied all but two of over thirty motions by Titiev’s
lawyers challenging the prosecution’s fabricated evidence.
 
“Oyub Titiev’s trial was a complete travesty
of justice, reminiscent of the show trials of the Stalin era. And like back
then, the goal was not so much to punish as to humiliate. Precisely for this
reason, the authorities depicted and charged Oyub as a junkie - Kadyrov
repeatedly referred to Oyub as a ‘drug addict’ - so Oyub would not only lose
his freedom but also his honor - which is all-important in Chechen society,” said Gerald Staberock,
OMCT Secretary General.
 
Systematic
harassment of human rights defenders in Chechnya
 
Oyub Titiev has worked for Memorial since 2001.
After the murder of Natalia Estamirova
in 2009, he became the head of the Grozny office of Memorial, one of the oldest
and well-respected Russian human rights organisations, and the last human
rights NGO with an office in Chechnya.
 
“This absurd trial might very well mark the end
of Memorial’s activities in Chechnya. Perhaps even more importantly, it has the
potential to complete Kadyrov’s program of eradication of human rights
defenders from Chechnya, thus removing the last remaining barrier to the
authorities’ abuses,” said Dimitris Christopoulos, FIDH President.  
 
---
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme
is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human
rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders
Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
International Partnership for Human Rights
(IPHR) is an independent, non-governmental organization founded in 2008. Based
in Brussels, IPHR works closely together with civil society groups from
different countries to raise human rights concerns at the international level
and promote respect for the rights of vulnerable communities.
 
For more information, please contact:
·      
OMCT: Iolanda Jaquemet / Roemer Lemaitre: + 41 79 539 41 06 / + 41
22 809 49 39 
·      
FIDH: Eva Canan: + 33 6 48 05 91 57 
·      
IPHR: Simon Papuashvili: +32 494 75 39 42 