Egypt:  EU’s Commitment to Human Rights in Egypt Rings Hollow
August 14, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Egypt / 2014 / AugustEgypt: EU’s Commitment to Human Rights in Egypt Rings HollowARABIC VERSION_EU’s Commitment to Human Rights in Egypt Rings Hollow4 pages / 7.76 MB

Brussels, 14 August 2014 – One year after the military’s deadly
onslaught on supporters of ousted President Mohamed Morsi, which left hundreds
dead and thousands injured, accountability remains elusive. 
 
The deadly dispersal of gatherings in al-Nahda
and Rabaa al-Adawiya squares in Cairo marked a grim milestone in a long history
of crackdown on dissenting voices, including civil society, peaceful protesters
and human rights defenders (HRDs). This particular event has been described
by the EU as disproportionate and resulting in an “unacceptable large
number of deaths and injuries”. The denial of entry to
the Executive Director and the Middle East and North Africa director of Human
Rights Watch (HRW) is only the most recent example of the government’s policy
in this regard. The HRW delegation was to brief diplomats and journalists in
Cairo on the findings of a report on the bloody dispersals of these
demonstrations. 
 
One year on, impunity prevails as authorities have failed to hold officials,
police and army officers accountable for the repeated use of excessive force. The EU has called on
the Egyptian interim government “to act on its promise and complete a
transparent and independent investigation”, but this has not been accompanied
by meaningful measures. Although a national fact-finding committee was created, its work is opaque and
its findings will not be made public. Furthermore, Egyptian authorities have
not yet allowed relevant UN special procedures mandate-holders, such as the special rapporteurs on
independence of judges and lawyers, human rights defenders, and the working
group on arbitrary detention to visit the country.
 
After decades of tacit support to dictators upholding impunity, the EU
tried to review its South
Mediterranean policy following the Arab Uprisings. However it has failed to
translate words into a coherent, principled policy and returned to favouring
short-term interest instead of human rights and accountability. 
 
EU-Egypt cooperation: words but no deeds
 
Since the Egyptian uprising of 25 January 2011, the
EU has been trying to establish itself as a key player in helping Egypt’s
transition to democracy. However, it has failed to develop and maintain a
coherent and consistent policy on human rights and democratisation in its
relation with Egypt. In its public diplomacy, the EU has reiterated the need to
uphold human rights, but it was nevertheless ready to accommodate the
authorities’ violations of international human rights commitments. As respect of
human rights is conducive to stability, this is the benchmark on which we assess
EU-Egypt relations.
 
The EU’s Foreign Affairs Council (FAC), charged with forging a common position
of the 28 EU member states on external relations, has adopted two sets of
conclusions since last summer. In its conclusions of August 2013, the
EU called for the full respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms, “guaranteed
by the rule of law and protected by a fully empowered civilian government”. In
light of this, the EU interrupted most of its direct funding to the Egyptian
government, suspended the export of any equipment that could be used for internal
repression and agreed to review its security assistance to Egypt. Assistance in
the socio-economic sector and to civil society has continued, also through
direct grants to the Egyptian government. The EU stated that it “will monitor
the situation in Egypt closely and readjust its cooperation accordingly”.
 
The second
set of FAC conclusions of February 2014 welcomed that
“the new Constitution enshrines human rights and fundamental freedoms,
including freedom of expression, assembly and women's rights. Existing and
future national legislation has to be in full compliance and implemented in
line with the Constitution and international standards. (…) The Constitution
should be applied in a way that ensures full civilian control over all branches
of government, and civilians should be tried in civilian courts at all times”.
All these concerns were reiterated in the EU’s progress report on
Egypt published in March 2014.
 
In June 2013, the European Court of Auditors published a report on EU
aid to Egypt, the full version of which has been regretfully removed from their
website. The report recommended to the European External Action Service and European
Commission (EC), to prioritise human rights and democracy in Egypt, and develop
an intensive dialogue on them with the Egyptian authorities, as well as to apply
conditionality rigorously in relation to human rights and “deep democracy”. Subsequently,
the EU tasked the High
Representative Catherine Ashton and the European Commission, to “review
the issue of EU assistance to Egypt under the European Neighbourhood Policy and
the Association Agreement on the basis of Egypt's commitment to the principles
that underpin them”. So far, the EU has not reported publicly on the
implementation of these recommendations. Moreover, it has been reported that direct
cooperation would resume as soon as Egypt’s
political roadmap is implemented. 
 
Against the background of repression, mass
death sentences, impunity and proven incapacity to face the previous trade liberalisations, the EU and Egypt began a dialogue in June 2013 on how to deepen further trade and investment, with a focus on
possible negotiations of a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement. To accompany the negotiation process, the EU has launched a sustainability
impact assessment (SIA), to ensure that the trade agreements are not
harmful to human rights abroad (see the EU’s own guidance and Handbook for
Trade Sustainability Impact Assessment). Non-Governmental
Organisations (NGOs) asked the EC to postpone the SIA, denouncing several shortcomings in
the way the study was carried out, and insisted that the current context in
Egypt is not conducive to a comprehensive and participatory assessment of the human
rights situation. However, the assessment has continued, and the final report
is due on 2 September 2014.
 
HRDs and draft law on associations: EU’s deafening silence
 
Despite the documentation of numerous cases of harassed and jailed HRDs,
including prominent activists such as Mr Alaa Abdel
Fattah, Ms Yara Sallam, Ms Sanaa Seif and Ms Mahienour El Masry, as
well as the fact that women HRDs have been identified
as a priority by the EU, the latter has been silent in the face of
their repression. In April, the EU High Representative visited
Egypt, but according to publicly available information, the situation of HRDs was
not on the agenda of discussions with Egyptian officials. Yet on
23 June 2014 the EU congratulated
itself for its implementation of the guidelines on
human rights defenders on their 10th
anniversary, stating that the EU's policy on HRDs has become “more effective
and coherent since the adoption of the Guidelines” and that the EU would “intensify its political and material support to human
rights defenders”. This shows a clear disconnect between EU’s
principles and discourse and its actions.
 
The EU has remained silent in the face of
ever-increasing restrictions and hurdles preventing NGOs from working in Egypt.
The government’s latest measures to hamper the exercise of freedom of
association by NGOs is a very repressive draft law on NGOs that could be adopted soon. On 18 July, the
Egyptian Ministry of Social Affairs published a notification requiring all
existing civil society entities to register as NGOs within a period of 45 days
under the threat of dissolution. 
 
Election observation: a murky business
 
Since last summer, the EU has been following closely the electoral
process. An election observation mission (EOM) was deployed around Egypt’s
December 2013 constitutional referendum, which was conducted in an environment lacking
democratic and pluralistic debate. The results of this EOM were
never published, but EU High Representative stated that
alleged irregularities “do not appear to have fundamentally affected the
outcome” and welcomed the fact that the new Constitution enshrined fundamental
rights and freedoms. She noted that the legislation would have to be in
compliance with the new Constitution and expected its application in a way that
would give full effect to civilian pre-eminence.
 
The EU deployed a fully-fledged EOM to observe the May 2014 presidential
elections. The final report of the EOM was delivered on 22 July, and commendably
included a number of important human rights recommendations. However, it stated
that these should be “long term measures,” in spite of the rapid deterioration
of human rights. Moreover, the report stated that the protest law should be
reviewed “in the long term’’, despite its blatant violation of international human rights standards. The
EOM added that “consideration should be given” to legal reforms to ensure that
“judicial decisions do not unreasonably restrict the participation of political
and civil society stakeholders in public life”. In particular, the EU notes
that detention without charge should be curtailed, the right to due process
should be respected and civilians should not be tried in military courts. All
these issues should be a priority for Egypt, not long-term goals.
 
In light of
this, we urge the EU and its member states to significantly
reinforce the coherence and consistency of its human rights and democracy
policy in its relation with Egypt and in particular:
 
-       
Continue to monitor the human rights
situation in Egypt through its embassies and delegations on the ground,
including the cases of HRDs, and publicly condemn human rights violations;
-       
Call upon the Egyptian authorities to
withdraw and review the draft law on associations;
-       
Continue trial observation by EU
representatives in Cairo, in particular for cases of HRDs and journalists, and
communicate publicly thereof;
-       
Call upon the Egyptian judicial
authorities to respect fundamental freedoms including the right to fair trial
in accordance with international standards, and immediately release all
detained HRDs;
-     Publicly remind Egyptian authorities
that the EU’s level and scope of engagement is conditioned by the country's
progress on human rights, democracy, and the rule of law, in accordance with
the European Neighbourhood’s Policy and its “more-for-more” principle;
-       
Ahead of launching official
negotiations on the EU-Egypt Free Trade Agreement, require authorities to take
the necessary measures to ensure that trade may effectively benefit human
rights. In the meantime, the EU should postpone the next phases of the SIA until
Egypt regains political stability and gives assurances that NGOs and
stakeholders can participate in the consultation process without interference. A
human rights impact assessment should determine if the context allows parties
to conclude an agreement without impeding the capacity of individuals to enjoy their rights or the capacity of State (and non-state actors, where relevant) to meet
their human rights obligations;
-       
Ban
the export of surveillance technologies that could be used to spy on and
repress citizens and uphold the ban on the export of security equipment or
military aid which might be used for internal repression;
-       
As
requested by the European Parliament and the European Court of Auditors,
clarify the specific measures which were taken in response to the decisions of
the EU Foreign Affairs Council to review EU assistance to Egypt; 
-       
Lead
efforts on a resolution on the human rights situation in Egypt at the next
session of the UN Human Rights Council.
 
For further information, please contact:
·      
EMHRN: Nicole Lambert : + 32 471 39 35 28
·      
FIDH: Audrey Couprie: +33 6 48 05 91 57
·      
OMCT: Currun Singh: + 41 22 809 49 39 