United States:  USA: scheduled execution of Scott Hain, a juvenile offender, on April 3
April  1, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / United States / 2003 / AprilUnited States: USA: scheduled execution of Scott Hain, a juvenile offender, on April 3The International Secretariat of OMCT is greatly concerned by the  deplorable state of the juvenile justice system in the United States  of America, especially in relation to the imposition of the death  penalty as well as life imprisonment without parole and adult  proceedings applied to offenders who committed crimes when they were  under 18. As the UN Commission on Human Rights drew to an end last  Friday, the United States attempted once again to omit any reference  to death penalty in the resolution on children's rights, which met  the opposition of the entire international community.    Execution of juvenile offenders continues   Scott Hain was executed on April 3rd  2003 by lethal injection and  was declared dead at 8:39 p.m.,  after the US Supreme Court  overturned a stay of the execution that had been granted by the 10th  US Circuit Court of Appeals in Denver in the previous day. The  Oklahoma Pardon and Parole Board also denied Scott's request for  clemency. His lawyer, Steven Presson, appeared at the hearing with  Scott, but Presson said he could not present a credible case for  clemency because of a lack of funds.  In May 1988,  Scott (at the age  of 17) was sentenced by a Tulsa court for the 1987 murders of Michael  William Houghton and Laura Lee Saunders in Tulsa, but in 1993, he  successfully appealed based on an error in jury instructions. Yet,  one year later, the state sentenced him to death again.  The International Secretariat of OMCT condemns this execution  and  considers that it is incompatible with international children's  rights law. The Secretariat is also greatly concerned for the 79  other juvenile offenders that await execution in the United States.   OMCT strongly supports the principles enshrined in the Convention on  the Rights of the Child (CRC), and in particular article 37 (a) which  forbids the imposition of "capital punishment (…) for offences  committed by persons below eighteen years of age (…)". While the  United States are not party to the CRC, OMCT considers that they are  nonetheless bound by this prohibition.  As stated by the Inter- American Commission on Human Rights,  "a norm of international  customary law has emerged prohibiting the execution of offenders  under the age of 18 years at the time of their crime.(…)" and  "(…)this rule has been recognized as being of sufficiently indelible  nature to now constitute a norm of jus cogens (…)" .  Life imprisonment applied without pity  Lionel Tate, a 14 year old boy, was sentenced to life imprisonment  without parole on  March 9th  2001. He was found guilty of the murder  of Tiffany Eunick, a 6-year-old girl. Tiffany died on July 28th  1999  at Lionel's home, after he had beaten her, when he was 12 years old.  On August 11th  1999, the Grand jury indicted Lionel and charged him  as an adult, with first-degree murder. On  January 16th  2001, the  trial began and on March 9th  2001 the judge sentenced him to life in  prison without parole.  He is currently in the Okeechobee Juvenile  Offender Correction Centre, where he will remain until he is 16,  after which he will finish his sentence in an as yet unknown adult  penitentiary. It should also be noted that the State Governor is  empowered to commute his sentence.     In April 1999, Rebecca Falcon was sentenced to life imprisonment  without  parole at the age of 15. She was indicted as an adult and  convicted under Florida law for the felony murder of Richard  Phillips, a cab driver. On November 19th  1997,  Rebecca had gone out  in the evening with a 14-year-old friend from school and his 18-year- old cousin, Clifton Gilchrist. The three of them took a taxi cab.  Clifton, who is known to be usually armed, had a gun with him. That  night, the cab driver was shot that evening and he died six days  later. Before being indicted, Rebecca was sent to a juvenile  detention facility and she was then transferred to an isolation cell  at the Bay County Jail. She currently resides at the Lowell Women's  Prison.     OMCT considers that these two cases of imprisonment of juvenile  offenders (as well as other similar cases) are an infringement of  international children's rights law, and in particular of article  37(a) of the CRC which forbids the imposition of "life imprisonment  without possibility of release (…) for offences committed by persons  below eighteen  years of age". In addition, article 37(b) of the CRC calls upon  states to use imprisonment against a child, that is a person under 18  years of age (art.1 CRC),  "only as a  measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of  time".    OMCT deems that detention on death row, as well as life imprisonment  without possibility of release, amount to torture or cruel, inhuman  and degrading treatment, which is  prohibited by the international instruments ratified by the United  States, when applied to particularly vulnerable persons such as  children (who are in the critical stages of  their development).  Children sentenced to death or to life  imprisonment are subjected to severe psychological suffering and  their long term social and emotional  development is deeply affected.   Adult proceedings imposed on juvenile offenders   Lee Boyd Malvo was arrested on October 24th  2002 with John Allen  Muhammad at a highway rest facility. They are suspected in the series  of Washington area shootings  that killed 10 people and wounded three others last October.  Malvo  was transferred to an ordinary court and on January 22nd  2003 he was  indicted as an adult with three  charges under Virginia law, namely for murder of more than one person  in three years, murder as an act of terrorism, and using a firearm  during a felony.  This indictment  makes him eligible to the death penalty, as Virginia has no minimum  age at which juveniles can be subjected to such sentences.    Increasingly, across the United States children are being tried as  adults when they commit serious crimes. In fact, it is considered  that  some types of  crimes are so  serious that they do not belong in a juvenile justice system that is  designed to promote the child's reintegration and holding of a  constructive role in society. For this reason,  many states have recently resorted to adult courts instead of  juvenile courts when such crimes were being considered.  OMCT is greatly concerned about this recent trend and is also deeply  preoccupied by the fact that trying juveniles as adults can make them  eligible for severe punishments  which have no rehabilitative purpose, such as the death penalty or  life imprisonment.   According to article 40(3) of the CRC, "States Parties shall seek to  promote the establishment of laws, procedures, authorities and  institutions specifically applicable to  children alleged as, accused of, or recognised as having infringed  the penal law (…)".  As a consequence, OMCT urges the United States authorities to abolish  the death penalty and life imprisonment without parole that is  imposed for offences committed by persons below 18 years of age and  to abolish laws which allow children to be tried as adult.    More specifically, OMCT calls on the United States authorities to  commute the sentences handed down to Lionel Tate, Rebecca Falcon and  other juveniles that have been sentenced to life imprisonment without  parole, to commute the sentence of the 79 juvenile offenders on   death row, and to guarantee that Lee Boyd Malvo (and all minors  having committed serious crimes) will not be tried as an adult. 