Sudan:  Sudan: A case filed regarding the torture and death of Mr. Adam Joumma’ Bakour
April 11, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2005 / AprilSudan: Sudan: A case filed regarding the torture and death of Mr. Adam Joumma’ BakourCase SDN 200105.1 Follow-up to case SDN 200105 Arbitrary Detention / Torture / Death in detention / Judicial proceedings  Geneva 11 April 2005  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information concerning the following situation in Sudan.   New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudan Organisation Against Torture (SOAT), a member of the OMCT network, that a case has been filed against the armed forces of Marla regarding the torture and death in detention of Mr. Adam Joumma’ Bakour, but that no progress has been seen so far. According to the new information received, three of the other four detainees concerned (Mr. Idrees Jai Khmees, Mr. Souleiman Khatir Khamees, Mr. Araiba Adam and Mr. Abdella Mohamed Khamees) remain in military custody.    Remarks  OMCT calls for an impartial and exhaustive investigation into the torture and death of Adam Joumma’ Bakour, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and apply to them the civil, penal and/or administrative sanctions provided by law.   Reminder of the situation  OMCT recalls that on 20 December 2004, armed forces in Nyala arrested 5 men, four belonging to the Zaghawa and one from the Fur tribe from Marla village in the Nyala province. The names of the 5 men are:  1.	Adam Joumma’ Bakour, 35 yrs  2.	Idrees Jai Khmees, 55 yrs, Marla  3.	Souleiman Khatir Khamees, 22 yrs, Marla  4.	Araiba Adam, 39 yrs, Fur tribe, Marla  5.	Abdella Mohamed Khamees   According to the information received, the men were arrested at the market in Marla and detained in a military custody centre in Marla. During their detention, they were taken to an underground room in the military centre where they were tortured by armed forces and Janjaweed militias. Their hands and legs were tied with rope and they were beaten severely with sticks and the barrel of guns on their heads, as well as being flogged on the back.  One of the detainees, Adam Joumma’ Bakour, allegedly died as a result. The four other detainees received medical treatment at Marla hospital.  On 12 January 2005, one of the detainees (name withheld for security reasons) was released and he is receiving medical treatment for his injuries. The three other men are currently still detained at the military Offices in Marla with no official charges against them.   Requested Action: Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:   i.	guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the three remaining detainees;  ii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the arbitrary detention and torture of all 5 detainees, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and apply to them the civil, penal and/or administrative sanctions provided by law;   iii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the death of Adam Joumma’ Bakour, including a post-mortem, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and apply to them the civil, penal and/or administrative sanctions provided by law, and guarantee that adequate reparation is awarded to the victim’s family;  iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international humanitarian law and human rights standards.   Addresses: His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, President' s Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 783223  Mr. Ali Mohamed Osman Yassin, Minister of Justice and Attorney General, Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 788941  Mr. Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affair, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 779383   Dr. Abdelmuneim Osman Mohamed Taha, Advisory Council for Human Rights, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 770883  His Excellency Ambassador Mr. Mohamed Al- Hassan Ahmed Al-Haj, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 335, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 731 26 56, +41 22 716 19 70, E-mail: mission.sudan@ties.itu.int.  Please also write to the embassies of Sudan in your respective country.   Geneva, 11 April 2005  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 