Moldova, Republic of:  Take action: Fear for the safety of Mr. Vitalie Eriomenco, a 42-year-old businessman from Vadul-lui-Voda, currently detained in Tiraspol prison n° 3
August 17, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Moldova, Republic of / 2011 / AugustMoldova, Republic of: Take action: Fear for the safety of Mr. Vitalie Eriomenco, a 42-year-old businessman from Vadul-lui-Voda, currently detained in Tiraspol prison n° 3MDA 170811Allegations of torture and ill-treatment/
Threats/ Due process violations/ Lack of an effective investigation/ Lack of
adequate medical attention/ Fear for the safety
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation intheRepublic
of Moldova/ Region of Transnistria.
Brief Description of the Situation
The
International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source and
Antenna International, a member organisation of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about
the alleged torture and ill-treatment suffered by Mr. Vitalie Eriomenco,
a 42-year-old businessman from Vadul-lui-Voda, a suburb of Chisinau
municipality, and living in Slobozia (administrative sub-district of Transnistria), the lack of an effective investigation into the aforementioned
allegations and the absence of adequate medical assistance.
According to the information received, on 29 March
2011, Mr. Vitalie Eriomenco was arrested without a warrant at work, in Slobozia, by six men in plain clothes, members of the
Department for Combating Organized Crime and Corruption of the Ministry of
Interior of
the unrecognized Transnistrian
authorities (Pridnestrovian Moldavian
Republic[1] or PMR, also
known as "Pridnestrovie"), on
charges of theft. Shortly after Mr. Vitalie Eriomenco's arrest, his home was searched with no mandate and his
home keys were confiscated. His wife and two children were reportedly woken up
and forced to leave the house without taking any clothes or items. To date, Mr.
Vitalie Eriomenco’s wife and children are forbidden to enter the house. 
According
to the same information received, Mr. Vitalie Eriomenco was interrogated for about ten hours after his
arrest. During the interrogations, he was allegedly ill-treated, denied access
to a lawyer and threatened that his son would be arrested if he refused to recognize
the alleged theft of 12’000$ from his own business. Fearing for the safety of
his family, Mr. Vitalie Eriomenco reportedly signed a document confessing to
the alleged crime. He was subsequently detained in the basement of the Tiraspol pre-trial detention
centre (SIZO), in conditions amounting to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. He was kept in
a humid cell, without ventilation or adequate access to sanitation, and water. 
During the two first days of his detention,
Mr. Vitalie Eriomenco was also reportedly forced to sign a document
renouncing to his right to legal counsel and stating that he would represent
himself before court. On 31 March 2011, he was allowed to be assisted by a
lawyer, albeit chosen by the authorities and from the Transnistrian region. Mr.
Vitalie Eriomenco’s parents subsequently
hired another lawyer from Moldova,
who was allowed to work on Mr. Vitalie Eriomenco’s case. However, this latter has reportedly suffered several
obstacles, including limited access to Mr. Vitalie Eriomenco in detention
and to documents. 
On 1 April 2011, Mr. Vitalie Eriomenco was remanded in custody for 60 days on charge of “theft
of large amount” after he appeared at the Tiraspol court. He was again remanded in custody for 60 days
on 26 June 2011. On 11 May 2011, Mr. Vitalie Eriomenco had reportedly made a written
request to the criminal investigator for a new hearing to denounce that his
confession was obtained under duress. However, the request was dismissed. He is currently detained in Tiraspol prison n° 3. Since his arrest, Mr. Vitalie Eriomenco has been denied access
to his family, despite that several requests were submitted to the authorities.

According to the same information, Mr. Vitalie Eriomenco has been suffering, for many years, from
several chronic diseases, including a stomach ulcer, urinary infections, prostatitis,
neurological and heart problems, which require a regular medical follow-up and
a specific diet. It is reported that his health has worsened since his
detention due to the lack of adequate medical care and poor conditions of
detention (including limited access to sanitation and lack of adequate food,
dark, cold and overcrowded cell). He has reportedly only received the medicines
he was taking before his arrest after being transferred to the prison’s
hospital, on 8 June 2011. Once at the hospital, he was also reportedly
forced to undergo a medical psychiatric and neurological examination. To date,
the results thereof remain unknown, despite that Mr. Vitalie
Eriomenco’s lawyer filed a request to obtain the legal
justification and the results of the examination. Furthermore, Mr. Vitalie
Eriomenco’s family has received no information
regarding his current health condition.
OMCT
expresses its deep concerns about the safety and physical and psychological
integrity of Mr. Vitalie Eriomenco and
of his family, and calls on the de facto Transnistrian authorities to guarantee
his safety at all times. 
Actions requested
Please write to the de facto authorities of the Region of Transnistria (so-called Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic), the authorities of the Republic of
Moldova and the Russian Federation, and urging them to:
i.                    
Guarantee, in all
circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Vitalie Eriomenco and of his family;
ii.                  
Grant Mr. Vitalie Eriomenco full access to his lawyer and his family, as well as guarantee that he
is promptly examined by independent doctors and receives adequate and free
medical care, in accordance with, inter alia, the UN Standard Minimum Rules for
the Treatment of Prisoners;
iii.                 
Order his immediate
release;
iv.                
Carry out a prompt,
effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into these events,
in particular the allegations of torture and ill-treatment inflicted on Mr. Vitalie Eriomenco, the result of which must be made public, in order to bring those
responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply
penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law ;
v.                  
Ensure that adequate, effective and prompt reparation,
including adequate compensation and rehabilitation, is granted to the victim
concerned. 
Addresses
De facto Transnistrian authorities:
·        
Igor
Smirnov, President of Transnistria, MD-3300, ул. 25 Октября, 45, for on-line petitions: http://president.pmr-gov.org/anketa.
Tiraspol, Republic of Moldova; 
·        
Rogojina
L. P., Presidential Administration, MD-3300, nr 45, 25-Oktyabrya str., Tiraspol, Republic of Moldova; tel:(373
533) 6-27-36; tel/fax: (373 533) 9-72-44;
·        
Vladimir
Antyufeev, Ministery of State Security, MD-3300, 42 Manoilova str., Tiraspol, Republic of Moldova; priem@mgb-pmr.org; tel/fax: (373 533) 94627
·        
StepanovS., Ministry of Justice, MD-3300,
26 Lenina str., Tiraspol, Republic of Moldova; tel.: (373 533) 8-17-53, 9-20-41; inbox@justice.idknet.com
·        
Anatoli
Guretski, Prosecutor of Transnistria,
MD-3300, Tiraspol, 383 Liebknecht
str., Republic of Moldova; tel.: (373 533) 9-51-47,
9-44-84; fax: (373 533) 9-44-92;
·        
Rimari V.S.,Chairman of the Supreme Court,
MD-3300, 29. Iunosti str., Tiraspol, Republic of Moldova; тел./факс: (373-533) 2-50-06, for on-line
petitions: http://vspmr.org/mailform.php;
·        
Kaminski A.V., Chairman of the Supreme Soviet (Local
Parliament),MD-3300, ул. 25 Октября, 45,., Tiraspol, Republic of Moldova; kav@vspmr.org;
Republic of Moldova:
·        
Vlad Filat, Prime Minister of Republic of Moldova, Chisinau, Piaţa Marii Adunări Naţionale 1, Tel. (+373 22) 250 101; for on-line petitions: http://www.gov.md/feedbacktxt.php?l=en&idc=439

·        
Zubco
Valeriu, General Prosecutor, Republic of Moldova, Chisinau, str. Banulescu
Bodoni26 ; tel/fax.: (+ 373 22) 212 032; email: procuror@procuratura.md, for on-line petitions: http://www.procuratura.md/md/exp2/

Russian Federation:
·        
Mikhail Alexandrovich
Fedotov, Chairman of the Presidential Human Rights Commission of the Russian
Federation, 103132, Moskva, Staraya pl., d 8/5, pod 3, Fax: +7 (495) 20 64
855; 
·        
Vladimir Lukin, Russian Federal Ombudsman
for Human Rights, , Fax: +7 495 207-74-70;
·        
Permanent Mission of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations in Geneva Av. de la Paix 15, CH-1211,
Geneva 20, Switzerland, E-mail: mission.russian@ties.itu.int
, fax: +41 22 734 40 44; 
Please also write to the embassies of the Republic of Moldova and of
the Russian Federation in your
respective country.
*******
Geneva, 17 August 2011
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting
the code of this appeal in your reply.



[1] The Transnistrian
region broke away from Moldova, declaring
independence unilaterally in 1990. The self proclaimed Pridnestrovian
Moldavian Republic (PMR) is not recognized by the
international community. 