Item 6 - UPR Outcomes Uzbekistan: Oral Statement
September 20, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / 2018 / SeptemberItem 6 - UPR Outcomes Uzbekistan: Oral Statement
Human Rights Council
39th session
20 September 2018
Thank you Mr.
President.
OMCT welcomes the
report of the working group on the UPR of Uzbekistan.
OMCT appreciates the
Uzbek authorities' expression of support for many of the recommendations made
in the report, including in relation to the fight against torture and the
protection of human rights defenders.
In this connection,
OMCT welcomes the release of human rights defenders arbitrarily detained for
their work and the invitation to international human rights organizations to
visit the country. On torture prevention, we note the codification in 2017 of
the prohibition to use evidence obtained through torture and the introduction
in 2018 of tougher penalties for torture.
However, OMCT remains
deeply concerned about the considerable rift between solemn declarations and
their implementation on the ground. Reports of torture, ill-treatment and
forced labor continue to emerge and many restrictions on independent civil
society organizations remain in force, in clear violation of Uzbekistan's
obligations deriving from various international human rights treaties. This
month a prominent human rights defender was briefly detained and not allowed to
travel to an OSCE conference in Warsaw, Poland.
OMCT asks Uzbekistan to
lift all travel bans or exit visa restrictions generally, and especially for
human rights defenders. Furthermore we call upon Uzbekistan to establish a
genuine anti-torture action plan drafted with input from all relevant
stakeholders, including domestic and international human rights NGOs, to
overcome systematic and systemic torture in the country, including, but not
limited to: a comprehensive judicial reform to ensure effective and real
safeguards against torture, a liberalization of the prison system, the
ratification of OPCAT and the creation of a national preventive mechanism, as
well as the formation of an independent commission of inquiry to investigate
all cases of torture since independence.
Finally, OMCT urges the
authorities of Uzbekistan to take concrete steps to ensure the full
rehabilitation of human rights defenders and activists detained and now
released, including access to proper medical, social and psychological support.
Thank you Mr.
President. 