Colombia:  Joint Statement to European authorities about the situation of MRVA and the areas around Hidroituango
May 22, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Colombia / 2018 / MayColombia: Joint Statement to European authorities about the situation of MRVA and the areas around Hidroituango Download full article3 pages / 688 KB
Public statement 

Brussels, 22 May 2018 



					 

The international community must call for the protection 
of the Living Rivers Movement in the Antioquia department (Movimiento Ríos Vivos Antioquia) 
and an investigation into murders of the Movement’s members. 


					 

The 
International Office for Human Rights – Action Colombia (OIDHACO) and 
the signatory organisations to this letter, would like to express their 
serious concerns to the European Union institutions, EU 
member States, Switzerland and Norway about the situation faced by the 
population affected by the Hidroituango development project in Colombia and 
about the Living Rivers Movement in the Antioquia department (Movimiento Ríos Vivos Antioquia 
), which 
is comprised of 15 associations of victims of the conflict; people affected 
by large-scale development projects; women and young people from the region 
where the project is located. 

					 

According 
to the Prevention and Protection Plan for the Movimiento Ríos 
Vivos Antioquia (MRVA) which the Movement developed with the support of the 
Interior Ministry, since 2013 and up until 1 March 2018, the 
MRVA suffered 151 security incidents, including the killings of two of its 
members. In light of these attacks committed by the state security forces, 
paramilitary groups and unknown perpetrators during evictions and peaceful 
protests, the MRVA requested guarantees from the Colombian State. In 2014 
some of these collective measures were granted, however, they took more than 
two years to be partially implemented and are in need of urgent revision. 
The Colombian State has also granted individual protection measures to nine 
members of the MRVA and is studying the cases of five others. Recently, a group of 
Swiss Parliamentarians sent a letter to several Colombian State 
institutions1, urging them to 
implement the measures contained in the Prevention and Protection Plan. 


					 






The 
population in the Hidroituango project’s area of influence has also 
undergone 10 forced evictions over the last few years, which have 
meant the loss of their ways of life and economic subsistence activities of 
more than 500 families in the area. These families traditionally work in 
barequeo (small-scale gold extraction) and fishing along the 
banks of the Cauca River. 

					 

In 
response to the damages suffered by the population, the company responsible 
for the project, Empresas Públicas de Medellín (EPM) has offered 
compensation, however, this is insufficient. The company only aims to 
compensate part of the activity of barequeo
2 but does not take into account that the population 
in the area also work as fisherwomen, farmers and casual labourers and that, 
like barequeo, it will no longer be possible to do this work when 
the area is flooded. In addition, the census carried out by EPM to gather 
data on the affected population did not take into account all the beach 
areas where the barequeo activity will disappear and did not 
communicate in a timely way with all the people affected so that they could 
get to the places where the census was being carried out. That meant that a 
good number of those people were excluded from the possibility of 
compensation. 

					 

In 
November 2017, representatives from the European Union 
Delegation in Bogotá and the Embassies of France and Spain in Colombia 
visited the area and learned about the situation first-hand3. On 20 April 2018, 25 members of the 
European Parliament sent a letter to the Colombian authorities4 expressing concern about this situation because of 
the possible impacts of the Hidroituango hydroelectric project. 

					 

The main impact would be the total lack of access to the 
bodies of victims of the armed conflict and forced disappearance that might 
be buried in the area that would be submerged after the flooding of the 
Hidroituango reservoir. According to the National Commission for Historical 
Memory, there are 1,029 victims of forced disappearance in the 12 
municipalities affected by the Hidroituango project. The Public 
Prosecutor’s Office carried out 159 exhumations of bodies in October 
2017, which means that hundreds of other bodies could still be buried in the 
area. The right to the truth for victims of the armed conflict, relatives of 
these forcibly disappeared persons, should be protected by the Colombian 
authorities and international actors who support the peace process in 
Colombia. 

					 

On 28 
April and 1 May 2018, a blockage occurred in one of the project’s 
diversion tunnels in the Cauca River, leading to alarmingly low water levels 
in some places and floods in others5 
and 
placing families in the area at risk. Blockages and unblockages have 
occurred in the last few days causing flooding of the river flow and the 
consequent eviction of hundreds of people 
6. The 
geological movements and landslides in the area have caused this situation, 
and the EPM has not brought it under control 
7. The 
MRVA has sent alerts about this situation and demanded answers from the EPM 
and the authorities. 

					 







Added to 
this situation is the murder of Hugo Albeiro George 
Pérez on 2 May 2018, a member of the El Aro Association of Victims and 
People Affected by Megaprojects (Asociación de Víctimas y 
Afectados por Megaproyectos - ASVAM) from the municipality of Ituango, an 
organisation which is part of the Movimiento Ríos 
Vivos Antioquia. The circumstances of his murder are unknown except that he was 
shot dead in a cafeteria in the municipality of Puerto Valdivia, which 
also claimed the life of Domar Egidio Zapata George
8. 

					 

The 
harassment against the MRVA has not stopped since then, as on 
8 May 2018, Luis Alberto Torres Montoya was also killed. Mr Montoya was from 
the Association of Small Miners and Fishers (Asociación de 
Pequeños Mineros y Pesqueros - AMPA) in Puerto Valdivia, which is part of the MRVA. 
Duvian Andrés Correa Sanchez9 was also killed
. 

					 

In the 
last few days four people have therefore been killed in this area
10 which continues to be affected by problems related 
to the construction of the Hidroituango project. The local communities need 
urgent protection from the authorities. 

					 

In light 
of all this, the signatory organisations to this letter call 
upon the European Union, its Member States, Switzerland and Norway to take 
action, by: 

Urging 
the Colombian authorities to protect the MRVA, by promptly 
implementing their Prevention and Protection Plan, and urgently protecting 
the communities in the area affected by Hidroituango from the risks linked 
to the construction of the dam and the presence of armed actors, placing 
their security and their lives at risk. 
Asking 
the Colombian authorities to initiate a rapid and 
transparent investigation into the killings of Hugo Albeiro George Pérez, 
Domar Egidio Zapata George, Luis Alberto Torres Montoya and Duvian Andrés 
Correa Sanchez and to prosecute the material and intellectual authors of this 
crime. 
Informing European companies that have an economic 
relationship with the Hidroituango project about the situation so that they can 
take appropriate measures. 
Promoting 
the right to truth for the victims of the conflict in the 
area where the Hidroituango project is located so that it can be 
definitively known whether more bodies are buried in the area and, if this 
is the case, that the victims’ rights are prioritised over the 
flooding of the area, in order to comply with the objectives established 
in the Peace Agreement between the Colombian government and the FARC-EP and 
guarantees of non-repetition. 

					 

					 

For 
further information, contact Miguel Choza Fernández, Oidhaco Coordinator 
at oidhaco@oidhaco.org
, or tel.+32 2 
5361913. 

					 

					 

1 Available at:  
https://krf.se/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/Brevet-till-Juan-Manuel-Santos.pdf
.
2 Movimiento Ríos 
Vivos Antioquia, “Delegación de Unión Europea visita zona de 
influencia de Hidroituango escucha y acompaña a las comunidades 
afectadas”, 8 November 2017, available at:  
http://debatehidroituango.blogspot.be/2017/11/delegacion-de-la-union-europea-constata.html
.
3 Ibid.
4 Available at 
 
https://krf.se/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/Brevet-till-Juan-Manuel-Santos.pdf
.
5 In relation to this, 
see  
https://defensaterritorios.wordpress.com/2018/05/02/derrumbe-en-tunel-de-hidroituango/ 
and 
 
https://twitter.com/RiosVivosCol/status/991483675610173440.
6 El Espectador, 
“ 
Creciente del río Cauca, sin víctimas mortales, pero con viviendas y 
puentes destruidos”, 13 May 2018, available at:  
https://www.elespectador.com/noticias/nacional/antioquia/creciente-del-rio-cauca-sin-victimas-mortales- 
pero-con-viviendas-y-puentes-destruidos-articulo-755554.
7 El Colombiano, 
“ 
Hay movimientos al interior de la montaña que no podemos controlar: 
EPM 
”, 13 May 2018, available at:  
http://m.elcolombiano.com/antioquia/hay-movimientos-al-interior-de-la-montana-que-no-podemos-controlar-epm- 
FL8692263
 . 

8 According to Amnesty International, available at: 
 
https://www.amnesty.org/download/Documents/AMR2383602018ENGLISH.pdf
.
9 El Espectador, 
“ 
Asesinan a otro líder social en Antioquia en menos de ocho días
”, 8 May 
2018, available at:  
https://www.elespectador.com/noticias/medio-ambiente/asesinan-otro-lider-social-en-antioquia-en-menos-de-ocho- 
dias-articulo-754713. 

10 Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights 
Defenders, a joint program of the Organización Mundial Contra la 
Tortura (OMCT) 
and the Federación Internacional de Derechos Humanos (FIDH), “
Colombia: 
Asesinato de dos integrantes del Movimiento Ríos Vivos Antioquia, y dos de 
sus familiares”, 11 May 2018, available at:  
https://www.fidh.org/es/temas/defensores-de-derechos-humanos/colombia-asesinato-de-dos-integrantes-del- 
movimiento-rios-vivos. 