China:  Follow-up of case CHN 280409: Release after completing his 17 years’s prison term of Mr. Jigme Gyatso, a 52-year-old Tibetan political prisoner from Amdo Kersul. OMCT remains concern about his poor health
April  3, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / China / 2013 / AprilChina: Follow-up of case CHN 280409: Release after completing his 17 years’s prison term of Mr. Jigme Gyatso, a 52-year-old Tibetan political prisoner from Amdo Kersul. OMCT remains concern about his poor health
Case CHN 280409.1
Follow-up of case CHN 280409
Release/
Poor health conditions
The International
Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) has received new
information on the following situation in the People’s Republic of China.
Brief description of the situation
The International
Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Tibetan Centre for Human Rights
and Democracy (TCHRD), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the recent
release after completing his 17 years’s prison term of Mr. Jigme Gyatso, a 52-year-old Tibetan political prisoner from Amdo
Kersul. OMCT remains concern about his poor health conditions. 
According to the
information received, Mr. Jigme Gyatso is in poor health struggling with
multiple medical problems, including weak eyesight, heart complications, kidney
disorder and difficult walking, probably due to the lack of adequate medical
care, poor conditions of detention and torture. 
According to the
same information received, Mr. Jigme Gyatso was detained on 30 March 1996 in
front of the Jokhang Temple in Lhasa and sentenced on 25 November 1996 to 15
years imprisonment and five years deprivation of political rights by the Lhasa
Municipal Intermediate People’s Court on charges of « endangering national
security » in connection with establishing an illegal organisation and
« incitement ». He was detained in Gutsa Public Security Bureau
Detention Centre for one year and a month, where he was tortured. In April
1997, he was transferred to Drapchi Prison where he served most of his prison
terms before his transfer to and incarceration in Chushul Prison in April 2005.
Depsite being seriously ill, he continued to serve his sentence in Chushul
Prison. His sentence was reportedly extended for two years in May 2004 after
shouting pro-Dalai Lama slogans. 
OMCT welcomes the release of Mr. Jigme
Gyatso. However, OMCT recalls that the Chinese authorities have to fulfil their obligations under
international human rights law to bringing to justice those responsible for
committing human rights violations and to providing justice for victims. 
Therefore, OMCT
urges the competent authorities to carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial
investigation into the allegations of torture and ill-treatment committed
on Mr. Jigme Gyatso during his arrest and detention, in accordance with
international human rights standards, the result of which must be made public,
in order to bring those responsible before a competent, independent and
impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as
provided by law. 
Background information
OMCT had been
earlier informed about the precarious health conditions of Mr. Jigme Gyatso and
had urged for his release on medical grounds. 
Between 1988 and
1989, Mr. Jigme Gyatso was the leader of a secret youth organisation called the
“Association of Tibetan Freedom Movement”. On 17 January 1992, he organised a
demonstration in Lhasa, during which many of the demonstrators were arrested
and detained by the People’s Security Bureau (PSB) and the officials of the
anti-riot department. Mr. Jigme was not arrested at that time but PSB officials
had suspected he was involved and had kept him under strict surveillance until
his arrest in 1996.
Actions Requested
Please write to the authorities in the People’s Republic of China urging
them to:
i.              
Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological
integrity of Mr. Jigme Gyatso;
ii.             
Carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent
and impartial investigation into the aforementioned facts, notably
the acts of torture and ill-treatment, in accordance with international human
rights standards, the result of which must be made public,in order to bring those responsible
before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil
and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;
iii.           
Ensure that adequate,
effective and prompt reparation, including adequate compensation and
rehabilitation, is granted to Mr Jigme Gyatso;
iv.           
Guarantee the respect of human rights and the
fundamental freedoms throughout the country with inclusion of all its
imprisoned persons in accordance with national laws and international human
rights standards.
Addresses
·  
Mr. Li Keqiang Guojiazhongli, Prime
Minister of the People’s Republic of China, Guojia Zongli, The State Council
General Office, 2 Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017, People’s Republic of
China, Fax: +86 10 65961109 (c/o Ministry of Foreign Affairs) Email: notice@scio.gov.cn
·  
Minister of Justice of the People’s
Republic of China, Buzhang Sifabu, 10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Chaoyangqu,
Beijingshi 100020, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6529 2345, Emails: minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cn
·  
Ambassador Liu Zhenmin, Permanent
Mission of the People’s Republic of China, Chemin de Surville 11, P.O. Box 85,
1213 Petit-Lancy 2, Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7937014, E-mail: chinamission_gva@mfa.gov.cn
·   Permanent Mission
of the People’s Republic of China, Chemin de Surville 11, P.O. Box 85, 1213
Petit-Lancy 2, Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7937014, E-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int
Please also write
to the embassies of the People’s Republic of China in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 3 April
2013
Kindly inform us of
any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 