Cameroon:  Arbitrary arrest and detention of Mr. Nfor Ngala Nfor and excesssive use of force
March  8, 2007
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Cameroon / 2007 / MarchCameroon: Arbitrary arrest and detention of Mr. Nfor Ngala Nfor and excesssive use of forceCase CMR 080307 Arbitrary arrest and detention/ Excessive use of force/ Ill-treatment/ Risk for physical integrity The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Cameroon. Brief description of the situation The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Association for the Reconstruction and Development of the Moko-Oh Peoples Cameroon (AFTRADEMOP), a member of the SOS-Torture network, about the arbitrary arrest and detention of Mr. Nfor Ngala Nfor, National Vice Chairman of the Southern Cameroons National Council (SCNC) and of 11 others members of the SCNC on 20 January 2007 in Bamenda. The details of the 11 members of the SCNC are as follows:  Mr. Mbinglo H. Humphrey, Northern Zone Chairman, residence in Bamenda Mr. Tanto Simon, National Auditor and National Information Bureau Member, residence in Bamenda Mr. Stephen Kongnso, County Chair, Bui, residence in Kumbo Mr. Henry Lamnyam, County Secretary, Donga Mantung, residence in Ndu Mr. Achu Njei David, Organising Secretary, Mezam County, residence in Santa Mr. Nguemo Clement, Financial Secretary, Santa LGA, residence in Santa Mr. Lucas Che Ngwa, Activist, residence in Bafut Mr. Dzeni Augustine Shiyntum, Activist, residence in Kumbo Mr. Mongo Steven, Activist, residence in Bamenda Mrs. Mbi Ann-Rita Eyong, Vice Chair, Kumba LGA, residence in Kumba Mr. Ngiewih Asunkwan, National Communication Officer (he was released on 6 March 2007), residence in Bameda  According to the information received, Mr. Nfor Ngala Nfor and the above 11 representatives were arrested, along with other members of SCNC (non-identified), during a press conference held within the premises of the SCNC office in Bamenda on 20 January 2007 by security forces without any warrant of arrest. After the opening of the press conference, the premises were raided by security forces of the Gendarmerie and Divisional Officers from the Mezam region who reportedly used excessive force, resulting in a large number of injuries. Members of the SCNC had assembled civilian and journalists for a press conference to inform of Mr. Nfor’s recent efforts to bring international attention to their situation. The SCNC advocates increased autonomy for Cameroon's English-speaking minority.   After some of the arrested members were released for various reasons, 12 of them, including Mr. Nfor Ngala Nfor, were transferred on 22 January 2007 to the Bamenda Central Prison. While Mr. Ngiewih Asunkwan was released on 6 March 2007, the others are still detained. According to the information, since their arrest, these individuals have been detained while not having been formally charged with any crime. The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned about the reported arbitrary arrest and detention of the above mentioned persons and the excessive use of force by security forces. OMCT calls on the authorities to guarantee their physical and psychological integrity and order their immediate release in the absence of valid charges that are consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times. Finally, OMCT urges the authorities to guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international humanitarian law and human rights standards. Action requested Please write to the authorities in Cameroon urging them to:  Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Nfor Ngala Nfor, Mr. Mbinglo H. Humphrey, Mr. Tanto Simon, Mr. Stephen Kongnso, Mr. Henry Lamnyam,  Mr. Achu Njei David, Mr. Nguemo Clement, Mr. Lucas Che Ngwa, Mr. Dzeni Augustine Shiyntum, Mongo Steven, and Mrs. Mbi Ann-Rita Eyong; Guarantee access to their families and lawyers; Order their immediate release in the absence of valid charges that are consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; Order a thorough and impartial investigation into these events, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the civil penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; Ensure the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  Mr. Paul Biya, President of the Republic, Presidency of the Republic, Palais de l’Unité, 1000 Yaoundé, Cameroon, Fax +237 222 08 70, Email: cclcom@prc.cm or cclcom@camnet.cm Mr. Amadou Ali, Minister of State responsible for Justice, Keeper of the Seals, Ministry of Justice, 1000 Yaoundé‚ Cameroon, Fax: + 237 223 00 05 Mr. Rémy Ze Meka, Minister of Defence, 1000 Yaoundé‚ Cameroon, Fax +237 223 59 71 Dr. Chemuta Divine Banda, Chairman of the National Commission on Human Rights and Freedoms (NCHRF), Tel: +237 222 61 17, Fax : +237 222 60 82, E-mail: cndhl@iccnet.cm Ambassador, Mr. Jean Simplice Ndjemba Endezoumou, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Cameroon to the United Nations Office at Geneva, rue du Nant 6, 1207 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax : + 41 22 736 21 65 Ambassador, Mrs. Isabelle Bassong, Embassy of Cameroon in Brusells, 131 av. Brugmann, 1190 Forest, Belgium, Tel : + 32 2 345 18 70 ; Fax : + 32 2 344 57 35; Email: ambassade.cameroun@skynet.be  Please also write to the embassies of Cameroon in your respective country. *** Geneva, 8 March 2007 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply 