Uzbekistan:  Uzbekistan: Threat of Rape and Harassment of Mrs. Surae Yusupova
September  9, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Uzbekistan / 2003 / SeptemberUzbekistan: Uzbekistan: Threat of Rape and Harassment of Mrs. Surae YusupovaCase UZB 090903.VAW Harassment of Relatives / Threat of Rape   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Uzbekistan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights, a member of the SOS-Torture network, of the harassment of Surae Yusupova, wife of Akmal Yusupov, by government officials in Uzbekistan.   According to the information received, on September 4, 2003, at 11:00 a.m., government officials from the City Administration of Internal Affairs (CAIA) arrived at Surae Yusupova’s home and conducted a search, without showing any warrants or other documents legitimizing such a search. The officials reportedly did not find anything incriminating in the house, but brought Mrs. Yusupova to the offices of the CAIA and questioned her there. It is reported that during the questioning, the officials threatened to rape Mrs. Yusupova. The officials reportedly brought her home in the afternoon, searched the house again, and then again brought Mrs. Yusupova to the offices of the CAIA for more questioning. She was returned to her home at 23:00 that evening. Mrs. Yusupova lives with her three children.   Surae Yusopova is the wife of Akmal Yusupov, who has been sentenced to twenty years imprisonment by a court in Uzbekistan. The report received alleges that Mr. Yusupov was unfairly sentenced under a variety of charges, including articles 156 (“for starting national, race and religious conflict”), 159 (“encroachment to the constitutional regime of Uzbek Republic”), 216 (“illegal organization of public associations or religious organizations”), 241 (“for not informing about crime or its concealment”), 244 (“forming, administration, participation in religious extremist, separatist, fundamental or any prohibited organizations”), and 28-246 (“co partnership in crime” – “contraband”).   OMCT is gravely concerned for the psychological and physical integrity of Mrs. Surae Yusupova and calls upon the government of Uzbekistan to immediately cease all harassment against her. OMCT is also deeply troubled by the sex-specific nature of the threats against her while she was arbitrarily detained, specifically the threat of rape. OMCT recalls that Uzbekistan has ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, which prohibits discrimination against women. Furthermore, the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against Women, in article 4(c), provides that States should “exercise due diligence to prevent, investigate and, in accordance with national legislation, punish acts of violence against women, whether those acts are perpetrated by the State or by private persons.”  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Uzbekistan urging them to:  i.  guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Surae Yusupova and her family; ii.  ensure an immediate, impartial investigation of the allegations of harassment and arbitrary detention; iii.  guarantee adequate reparation and protection for Mrs. Yusupova; iv.  guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout Uzbekistan in accordance with international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	President of Uzbekistan, Islam Abduganiyevich Karimov, ul. Uzbekistanskaya 43, Rezidentsia prezidenta, 700163 Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan, Fax: +998 71 133 7258, E-mail: presidents_office@press-service.uz   ·	Minister of Foreign Affairs, Sodiq Solihovich Safoyev, pl. Mustakillik, 5, 700029 Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan, Fax: +998 71 139 15 17  ·	Minister of Internal Affairs, Zakirzan Almatovich Almatov, ul Novruz 1, 700029 Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan, Fax: +998 71 133 89 34  ·	Parliamentary Commissioner for Human Rights, Sayora Rashidova, ul. Xalqlar Dostligi 1, 700035 Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan, Fax: +998 71 139 85 55, E-mail: office@ombudsman.gov.uz   ·	Chairman of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Uzbekistan, ul. Abdulla Kodiri, 1, 700183 Tashkent, Verkhovny Sud,  Republic of Uzbekistan  ·	General Procurator of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Rashidjon Hamidovich Kodirov, ul. Gulyamova 66, 700047 Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan, Fax: +998 71 133 39 17, E-mail: prokuratura@lawyer.com  Please also write to the embassies of Uzbekistan in your respective country.  Geneva, September 9, 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 