Egypt:  Deterioration of the Human Rights Situation Continues after the Formation of the New Government
June 23, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / Egypt / 2014 / JuneEgypt: Deterioration of the Human Rights Situation Continues after the Formation of the New GovernmentARABIC VERSION_Deterioration of the Human Rights Situation Continues after the Formation of the New Government2 pages / 3.73 MB

In view of the EU Foreign
Affairs Council meeting on 23 June, and the publication of the final report of the
EU Election Observation Mission (EOM), the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights
Network (EMHRN), the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH (International
Federation for Human Rights) express grave concern over the continuing
deterioration of the human rights situation in Egypt. 
 
As mentioned in EOM’s
preliminary statement, elections in Egypt took place in a context where space
for freedom of expression had been severely restricted, and all forms of
dissent and criticism, including those of human rights organisation, have been
stifled.
 
Despite the introduction of human
rights guarantees in the country’s new Constitution which acknowledges a number
of human rights, recent developments have shown that state institutions
continue to blatantly violate many human rights. The EU should remind these
institutions of their national and international legal obligations, and call
upon the new president and government to prioritise the
protection and promotion of human rights.
 
Space for freedom of assembly, association and
expression continues to shrink. Opposition figures, political activists,
journalists and human rights defenders, supporters of the deposed President
Mohamed Morsi and other dissidents, continue to be arbitrarily arrested. Government
officials have acknowledged that authorities have detained at least 16,000
individuals, including 1,000 protesters since January 25, 2014. Many of those
detained were rounded up solely for peacefully exercising their rights to free
assembly, association, and expression, or for their alleged affiliation with
the Muslim Brotherhood.
 
On 21 June, the police
arrested 30 activists protesting against the repressive Protest Law in the Heliopolis neighbourhood in Cairo. Some of the detainees
reported ill-treatment, including beatings by police during the arrest and later
at the police station.  After investigations
by National Security, officers 7 detainees were released, while the 23 others
were kept in prison and presented before the prosecutor’s office on Sunday. They
were charged with breaching the protest law, destroying public property,
participating in a march aiming at breaching public peace, possession of
inflammable materials, and engaging in an act whose objective is to terrorise
the public. Given these charges and recent similar cases, our organisations
express their deep concern that the trial could result in disproportionate
prison sentences. Among the detainees are two women human rights defenders:
Yara Sallam of the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights, who was arrested
near the protest area even though she was not taking part in it; and Sanaa
Seif, a 18-years-old activist of the ‘No to military trials’ campaign and a
sister of the activist Alaa Abdel Fattah.
 
On 15 June,
Egyptian security forces confiscated the latest issue of Wasla, a magazine published
by the Arabic Network for Human Rights Information. They arrested a worker at
the press where the publication was being printed, charging him with possession
of publications that call for the overthrow of the regime and promote a
terrorist organization. Similarly, on 22 May, security forces stormed the
Egyptian Center for Economic and Social Rights. These cases demonstrate a pattern
of continued harassment of independent civil society groups.
 
Recent judicial practices
cast serious doubts on the independence of the judicial system and on
its ability to ensure accountability. In the last two months, first instance
courts have issued death sentences for more than a thousand people allegedly
responsible for the killing of two police officers. 
Human rights defenders and
civil society activists continue to be targeted through arbitrary legal
proceedings. On 11 June 2014, the use of Egypt’s judiciary to silence dissidents
was demonstrated yet again. Prominent Egyptian activist Alaa Abdel Fattah and
24 others, charged with violating Egypt’s Protest Law, were sentenced to 15
years of prison, five years of subsequent police surveillance and a fine of LE
100,000 (around 10.327€). Their hearing was held earlier than expected,
preventing Mr. Abdel Fattah and the other defendants from attending. 
 
The Foreign Affairs Council
convenes almost a year since the mass killings of protesters on 14 August 2013
at Raba’a which followed the ouster of former President Mohamed Morsi. So far, Egyptian
authorities have failed to hold police and army officers and officials accountable
for the repeated use of excessive and lethal force. Despite declarations
stating the opposite, prosecutors have failed to investigate any military or
police officers for their unlawful use of force, while thousands of protesters
have been detained for alleged violations of the new
protest law.
 
Furthermore, despite a new
law on sexual harassment, violence against women has been worsening
especially in the public sphere, with dozens of cases of rape and sexual
violence during protests.  Such cases continue
to be met with indifference, severely undermining women’s participation in
public life. The state has an obligation to protect participants in peaceful
protests and especially to protect women from violence and discrimination.
 
In light of this, we call
upon the Foreign Affairs Council and EU Election Observation Mission to address
the above mentioned ongoing human rights abuses in its final report[1]
and to urge the Egyptian authorities to:
 
-       
Ensure
that the provisions of the new Constitution on fundamental rights and freedoms,
including freedom of expression and assembly, are fully implemented;
-       
Guarantee
freedom of expression, assembly and association in general and especially during
the current electoral period;
-       
Put an
end to political harassment and arbitrary detention, including by dropping
charges against and releasing all those detained solely for the exercise of
their rights to free expression, association, and assembly, cease ongoing arrests and prosecution of
demonstrators solely for exercising their right to freedom of opinion and
assembly under the pretext of violating the assembly law and/or other
legislations and stop detaining persons without charge or trial for expressing
their opinion etc.; 
-       
Engage
in a genuine discussion with CSOs and legal experts on the law on public
assemblies and protest as well as the draft law on associations, and ensure
their conformity with international standards; 
-       
Take
decisive steps to end torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment,
including the reform of the security apparatus to ensure accountability for any
abuse;
-       
Adopt national strategies for combating violence
against women and eliminating all forms of discrimination against women,
ensuring the effective consultation and involvement of women’s rights groups
and other civil society organizations throughout the process;
-      
Ensure
accountability for violations of human rights, including through an independent
and impartial administration of justice.



[1]      The EOM mandate includes
the assessment of the overall environment of the election "including
respect for fundamental freedoms, civil and political rights" and the role
of the civil society. 