Nepal:   Fear for the safety of Ms. Harkali Pun, who was tortured in police custody, and concerns about the delays in initiating an effecitve investigation into the allegations
August 24, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2011 / AugustNepal:  Fear for the safety of Ms. Harkali Pun, who was tortured in police custody, and concerns about the delays in initiating an effecitve investigation into the allegationsNPL 240811
Torture and ill-treatment in
police custody with the purpose of
extracting a confession/ Fear for the physical and
psychological integrity/ Risk of impunity
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in
the following situation in Nepal.
Brief description of the
situation
The
International Secretariat of OMCT has been
informed by a reliable source and Antenna International, a member organisation
of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the torture and ill-treatment in custody of
Ms. Harkali Pun, 49 years old and
permanent resident of Motipur VDC-6, Mangalpur, Bardiya district. OMCT remains
concerned about her safety and the delays in initiating an effective investigation
into the aforementioned allegations. 
According to the information received, on 12 July 2011, Ms. Harkali Pun was travelling to Rupaidiya, India, in company of two women who
were allegedly going to New Delhi, when she was handed over
by two staff of an NGO working against women trafficking to the Jamunaha Police Office, Banke district, near the Indian border, on suspicion of human trafficking.
Ms.
Harkali Pun was reportedly only given an arrest warrant and a detention letter
on 14
July 2011, with effect from the
previous day. 
According to the same information, four to
five hours after Ms. Harkali Pun’s arrest, she was transferred to District
Police Office (DPO), Banke and detained in a cell. At around midnight,
she was brought by a police woman into a room on the first floor where three
policemen and one police women were sitting. An unidentified police officer,
probably a police inspector, then ordered the two police women to beat Ms.
Harkali Pun and all the other policemen left the room. The two constables named
Bhagwati and Rajheni (no further information) allegedly started to beat Ms.
Harkali Pun by turn with a three inch thick and one meter long wooden stick on
her palms, arms, back, bottom, thighs, legs, soles of her feet and other parts
of her body. They ordered her to stretch her legs and one of the constables sat
on her legs while the other beat on the soles of her feet. The two police
constables then reportedly asked Ms. Harkali Pun for her son’s and daughter’s
phone numbers and said that they would charge them too. They also interrogated
her about the alleged trafficking. She was reportedly tortured for about two
hours before she was taken to her house in a police van. There, the police
talked to her daughter and then brought her back to DPO, Banke. Once at the
detention centre, she was not allowed to see her children and the lawyer who
had come with her children. 
According to the same information, on 23 July 2011, Ms. Harkali Pun was reportedly taken to Bheri Zonal Hospital
for her medical check-up. She was diagnosed with a fractured right hand and was
recommended to have it plastered. Her broken hand was reportedly swollen and
her left hand showed blue marks of torture and had three twisted fingers. Her
feet were also reportedly swollen and she complained of pain all over her body.
The police then asked if she had money. As she only had 500.- Nrs, the money
was used only for an x-ray of her broken hand and to buy some pain killers. One
of the police women then reportedly ordered Ms. Harkali Pun to tell that her
hand had been broken by slipping from a staircase. 
On 24 July 2011, Ms. Harkali Pun’s daughter reportedly filed, on behalf of
her mother, a physical and mental check-up application before the District
Court, Banke under the Torture Compensation Act – 2053, Section 5, sub-section
3[1]. The same day, the District Court, Banke ordered the DPO,
Banke to provide a medical check-up to the applicant within three days and to
submit the documents related to her case, including medical reports. The police
subsequently took Ms. Harkali Pun, on 25 July 2011, to the hospital for the medical check-up but no medical
treatment was reportedly provided to her. 
According to the same
information, on 28 July 2011, activists handling Ms. Harkali Pun’s case met with Superintendent
of Police (SP) Dinesh Amatya to inquire about the allegations of torture and
the denial of adequate medical care. The police officer reportedly denied the
allegations and added that Ms. Harkali Pun’s hand might have got broken during
the arrest. However, during discussions with other police officers of the DPO,
these latter acknowledged that Ms. Harkali Pun’s hand was fractured and added that
there was no money to cover her medical expenses. 
On 28 July 2011, Ms. Harkali Pun was reportedly again brought to the
District Court to extend her remand but the Registrar refused the extension as
the police did not provide the medical report in accordance with the 24 July
court order. She was eventually taken, on 31 July 2011, to the Western and Research Center Hospital where her fractured hand was plastered and where she was
prescribed medicines. She was transferred to District Jail on 7 August 2011, where she remains detained pending trial. To date, no
effective investigation has been reportedly carried out into the allegations of
torture and ill-treatment. 
The
International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its deep concern about the torture
and ill-treatment of Ms. Harkali Pun and the delays in providing her with
prompt and adequate medical care. OMCT urges the competent authorities to
guarantee her physical and psychological integrity at all times.
OMCT recalls that
the authorities are legally bound to effectively ensure the physical and
psychological integrity of all persons deprived of liberty in accordance with
international human rights law, and in particular, the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
OMCT also recalls that, in line with their obligations
under the abovementioned treaties, it is incumbent on the competent Nepalese
authorities to consider seriously any allegations of torture and ill-treatment,
and to undertake a prompt, effective, thorough, independent
and impartial investigation in this
regard, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and
apply adequate sanctions. 
Action requested
Please write to the authorities in Nepal urging them to:
i.                    
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Harkali Pun, her
family and the lawyers working on her case; 
ii.                  
Grant Ms. Harkali Pun full access to her lawyers and
her family, as well as guarantee that she receives adequate medical care if
necessary, in accordance, inter alia,
with the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners; 
iii.                 
Order her
immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent
with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring her
promptly before an impartial, independent and competent tribunal and guarantee
her procedural rights at all times; 
iv.                
Carry out a prompt, effective,
thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the aforementioned
facts, in particular the
circumstances of the detention of Ms. Harkali
Pun and the allegations of torture and
ill-treatment, in accordance with international human rights standards, the result of which must
be made public, in orderto bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial
tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by
law;
v.                  
Guarantee that no evidence obtained under torture
and other forms of ill-treatment, or threats thereof, be used in court
proceedings against Ms. Harkali Pun as stipulated in Article 15 of the UN Convention
Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
vi.                
Ensure that adequate, effective and prompt
reparation, including adequate compensation and rehabilitation, is granted to Ms. Harkali Pun;
vii.               
Ensure
the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards, in
particular ensure that all acts of torture, and cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment and punishment are clearly defined in law as offences in accordance
with the provisions set out in Articles 1, 4 and 16 of the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and that
they be made punishable with appropriate penalties which take into account the
grave nature of the crimes as required;
viii.             
Ensure the respect of human
rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with
national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
Ø      Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of Home Affairs, Mr. Narayan Kaji Shrestha, Ministry of Home Affairs,
Singha Darbar, Kathmandu, Nepal. Tel: + 9 77 1 421 1211 / + 9 77 1 421 1264,
Fax: + 977 1 42 11 232
Ø      Inspector General of Police, Rabindra
Pratap Shah, Police Head Quarters, Naxal, Kathmandu, Nepal, PO. Box No.: 407, Fax: + 977 1 4
415 593. Email: info@nepalpolice.gov.np
Ø      Attorney General, Mr. Yuba Raj
Sangraula, Office of Attorney General Ramshahpath, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: + 977
1 4262582, Email: attorney@mos.com.np , info@attorneygeneral@gov.np , socialjus@gmail.com

Ø      DSP Bishwa Adhikari, Human
Rights Cell, Nepal Police, Kathmandu, Nepal PO. Box. No.: 407, Fax: + 977 1
4415593 E- mail: hrcell@nepalpolice.gov.np
Ø      Chairman of the National Human
Rights Commission, Mr. Kedar Nath Uppadhya, Pulchowck, Lalitpur, Nepal; Email: nhrc@nhrcnepal.org  and also complaints@nhrcnepal.org  Fax: + 977 1 5547973
Ø      Permanent Mission of Nepal, 81 rue de la
Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland,
Fax: + 4122 7332722, E-mail: mission.nepal@bluewin.ch

Please also write to the embassies of Nepal in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 24 August 2011
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.



[1]  “In
case any adult member of the family of a detainee, or his attorney, feels that
the detainee has been tortured, he may file a petition to the appropriate
district court. In case such a petition is received, the court may issue an
order for the examination of the physical or mental condition of the detainee
within three days. If, in the course of such examination, it is found that
treatment is necessary, such treatment shall be made available by the
government.” 