Summary Report TB-NET & Amnesty International Event on Treaty Body Elections
December 20, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionReports and Publications / 2018 / DecemberSummary Report TB-NET & Amnesty International Event on Treaty Body Elections Download full article5 pages / 365 KB
Summary
Report 
“TB-NET Event on Treaty Body Elections”
9:00 am
-12:30 pm, Thursday 15 November 2018
Centre
International de Conférence de Genève (CICG)

Introduction

The event was organized by TB-Net and Amnesty International.
TB-Net is an informal group of international NGOs and networks working in
strategic partnerships with the UN Treaty Bodies. Currently, TB-Net comprises: the
Centre for Civil and Political Rights (CCPR Centre); Child Rights Connect; the
Global Initiative for Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (GI-ESCR); the
International Disability Alliance (IDA); the International Movement Against All
Forms of Discrimination and Racism (IMADR); the International Women's Rights Action
Watch Asia Pacific (IWRAW-AP); and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT). 
The event was co-sponsored by the Permanent Mission of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Permanent Mission
of Switzerland, as well as the International Rehabilitation Council for Torture
Victims (IRCT). 
This event was conducted as a roundtable working meeting
under the Chatham house rule[1]
to discuss amongst States and other key stakeholders including the UN Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and NGOs, the current
nominations and elections processes for Treaty Body membership, and proposals
for improvements which aim to enhance the quality, independence and diversity
of Treaty Body membership.
A Background document and a “Draft Roadmap for Quality,
Independence and Diversity of Treaty Body Membership” were provided in advance
to stimulate the discussion. The Background document can be found here.
The Draft Roadmap can be found here.

This Summary Report provides a summary of the discussions at
the meeting, the key proposals for moving forward.

Summary of Discussions

In the introductory remarks, States and civil society
representatives emphasised the importance of a strong, independent and
effective treaty body system and the important role of States in ensuring this,
through the nomination and election of quality, independent and diverse treaty
body members. The discussion focused on the two elements of the elections
process: nomination of candidates; and election of members.
Nomination
of candidates for treaty body membership
While the majority of participating States had not
established a formal open and participatory nomination process, a number of
States had undertaken informal processes which included consultation with
national civil society, national human rights institution, academia as well as
outgoing Treaty Body members. A couple of States said they were beginning the
process of establishing a formal and transparent nomination process and
therefore found the discussion very timely.
Several State representatives gave examples of promising
practices for an open and merit-based nomination process at the national level.
In those States, the government issued a public call for applications for the relevant
treaty body nomination. The public call set out the general and Treaty-specific
requirements and was advertised on Government websites and other platforms,
including leading newspapers, as well as disseminated to relevant civil society
organisations and universities (notably those in the international law
community). A selection panel was established to shortlist and interview
candidates. The panel was composed of representatives from the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, another relevant Ministry, and a representative who is
independent of government, such as a representative from civil society in the
field of the concerned human rights instrument or from the National Human
Rights Institution. It was stressed that such a process can bring significant
positive impacts at relatively low cost.
Various challenges in the nomination process were shared
among the participants. A number of States noted that the informality of their
current process meant that personal relationships were the most common way of
experts being identified and nominated. Those with a more formal and
transparent nomination process noted that it assisted in surfacing strong
candidates who did not have such personal relationships and in avoiding a
perception of cronyism. Generally States considered that, whether or not they
have a formal process in place, consultations with stakeholders, including
civil society, was an important step in identifying candidates for nomination.
The knowledge gap between the capital and Geneva about the
UN Treaty Body system and qualifications required for experts, can pose a
challenge in nominating the most qualified experts. Some States recommend a
stronger emphasis in the nomination process on UN language skills and
experience in working at the international/ regional level. The lack of
awareness about the treaty bodies, and the inconsistency of criteria for
nominating a candidate was raised as a problem. Some States thought clearer
guidelines or criteria (a ‘checklist’) would assist them to formalise their
nomination process. The importance of having a dedicated person to co-ordinate
the process was also highlighted and States discussed the relative benefits of
the process being hosted by different government Ministries.
Whilst most States said that diversity of membership was
important, few had specific selection criteria to ensure diverse nominations. Systematic
gender inequality in society was pointed to as a root cause for the fewer
number of women nominated compared to men. Some noted that the time demands of
treaty body membership also deterred many experts with family and caring
responsibilities. A number of States emphasised that in order to address gender
imbalance, States should actively encourage women to apply for nomination.
In many States, the selection and nomination of a candidate
is a time-consuming process which requires planning approximately 1-2 years in
advance. It was recommended that States begin planning 2 years in advance to
properly undertake nomination procedures and be ready for elections at the
international level. In this regard, the development of lists of upcoming
vacancies in the Treaty Bodies by the OHCHR was welcomed as a useful resource.[2]
The OHCHR has enhanced its publication of relevant information, including
providing the overview of the current Treaty Body membership in terms of gender
and geographical representation. It could further enhance timely information
flow towards States Parties, including information on gaps in the different
expertise of members and also the visibility of this information. Civil society
was also encouraged to provide further information on these aspects.
Election
of treaty body members
States pointed out that at elections, candidates nominated
through the open and merit-based process received positive feedback from other
States parties and were easier to promote as they have already been vetted
through the open process. Experiences suggest that the candidates nominated via
this process have a greater chance of being elected. Those experts have made
notable contributions in both substantial and organisational elements of their
Treaty Bodies including the improvement of working methods and the development
of general comments. 
Collecting information on candidates was identified as one
of the main challenges for States when making voting decisions. One problem is
the timeframe between the deadline for nominations and the day of elections (“Meeting
of States parties”) is short. In this regard, and very importantly, it was
suggested that OHCHR could consider moving the administrative deadline for
nominations to ensure that States have adequate time to properly collect
information, assess candidates and take informed decisions when voting. In
addition, due to the limited information available in the biographical data
form provided by the OHCHR, States often rely on other sources in order to
assess candidates’ profiles. The application forms for special procedure
mandate holders are good models for enriching information on candidates for the
Treaty Body membership.  
OHCHR is considering how to better stream-line the
application process and information available. It is studying the replicability
of the successful aspects of the on-line standardised application system used
for the Special Procedures mandate holders.
State delegates also gather information from their embassies
in the nominating State, from civil society and from meetings with the candidates
themselves. Face to face interaction, or at least through video-conference,
between candidates and States representatives in Geneva and New York was considered
essential. As a promising but not systematic practice, some States support
their candidate and organise meetings with other States representatives for
them to get to know the candidate and address questions to him or her. 
On independence, some participants explained the challenges
of assessing a candidate’s independence and said that it was not sufficient to
rely on information provided by the candidate or the nominating State, given
their conflict of interest. Often national NGOs are best placed to provide
information about independence from the State. Participants suggested that
candidates should be asked to provide more information on elements that attest
to their independence and that more information from civil society on this
point, would also be helpful.
There was discussion about the idea of holding public events
(or hearings) with all candidates for a particular election, similar to what is
done for the Human Rights Council. Whilst hearings might provide another
opportunity for States to find out more about candidates, concerns were raised about
the logistical and resource implications, given the number of candidates and elections
across the treaty body system. Some felt that public hearings might further
politicise the elections process and deter some people from nominating.
Civil society can also play a crucial role in elections of
Treaty Body members. Civil society can provide information to States,
particularly Permanent Missions in Geneva, about the candidates both formally
and informally. National civil society organisations are best placed to comment
on the qualification and independence of their national candidates.
International NGOs can work as a channel of information between national civil
society and Permanent Missions and provide useful information about sitting
members. Participants emphasised that the early timing of such information is
crucial if it is to impact States’ voting decisions. 
Participants noted that campaigning for candidates (and
potential vote trading) begins as soon as the candidature is declared. However,
it was realised that States have information about new nominations well before
civil society receive this information, making it difficult for civil society
to provide timely information about nominated candidates. More thought needs to
be given to ensuring that all relevant stakeholders have access to this
information as early as possible. States said they found useful both formal and
informal exchanges about candidates.
The role of Permanent Missions in Geneva in liaising with colleagues
in New York and the capital for nominations and elections was identified as another
crucial element. Because of the substantial knowledge and experience earned by Geneva-based
officials, more efforts can be invested in Geneva ahead of elections to raise
awareness about candidates.    
There was a frank discussion about the practice of ‘vote
trading’. It was acknowledged that almost all States engage in vote trading in
respect of treaty body elections and this often occurs far in advance of the
election and in relation to unrelated political bodies. However, many States emphasised
that they will not trade ‘blindly’ and will still apply some basic criteria
(such as a requirement of independence) to vote trades. Further, for many
elections, not all of States available votes are traded. Many States said that
the country and region of the candidate is the most important criteria. The
discussion also reflected on the difficulties of addressing diversity problems
in a treaty body (eg: gender imbalance), when most votes are traded.

Moving forward 

Participants generally agreed that a more formal and
transparent process for nomination of treaty body candidates was desirable.
However, it was stressed that different models will be appropriate in different
States and that a “step by step approach” is necessary to systematically move
forward in improving practices both at the national and international levels. Participants
said the ‘Roadmap’ document was useful for this process and could be developed
further following this meeting and in consultation with States. It would also
be helpful for States who have in place a formal nomination process, to make
available a short document describing the process and its objectives and
benefits.
A key element on which all stakeholders committed and has
already started to strengthen their efforts is the earlier timelier
availability of all the relevant information. The OHCHR has started to
publish a calendar for elections 3 years in advance, including detail on the gender
balance and geographical composition of each Treaty Body. The OHCHR will also consider
moving the deadlines for nomination and election processes to an earlier date,
to allow greater opportunity to share information about candidates and treaty
body gaps or needs. The further improvement of the OHCHR biographical data form
for candidates could also prove helpful. Civil society could continue the
practice of providing questionnaires to candidates and publish them online earlier,
based on new calendars.
Improved nomination procedures will ensure strong pools
of quality, independent and diverse candidates nominated by States. This
premise fulfilled, the practice of ‘vote trading’ between States prior to
elections, while not ideal, does not endanger the final outcome of the election
processes: a quality, independent and diverse membership of the UN treaty
bodies. Nevertheless, further developing practices, even if informal or non-systematic,
to enable States representatives in Geneva to meet candidates face to face and
to interact to assess them prior to voting remains in the pipeline. 
Whilst more significant proposals like public hearings and
an independent candidature assessment body remain on the table, there was less
enthusiasm for such proposals and a greater preparedness to first focus on
strengthening national nomination processes and information flows to inform
voting decisions.
10
December 2018



[1] A rule or principle according to which
information disclosed during a meeting may be reported by those present, but
the source of that information may not be explicitly or implicitly identified.


[2] OHCHR,
Elections of Treaty Body Members, https://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/Pages/ElectionsofTreatyBodiesMembers.aspx 