Vatican (Holy See):  Holy See to be reviewed by UN Committee Against Torture
May  2, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / Vatican (Holy See) / 2014 / MayVatican (Holy See): Holy See to be reviewed by UN Committee Against TortureJoint report OMCT and CRIN : Submission for the Periodic Review of the Holy See9 pages / 204 KB​PRESS RELEASE
Holy See to be reviewed by
UN Committee Against Torture
NGOs call on UN to consider rape and other
forms of child sexual abuse in the Catholic Church as violations of the
Convention Against Torture by the Holy See. 
Geneva (Switzerland), 2 May 2014.
The
UN Committee Against Torture (UNCAT) will review the Holy See for its adherence
to the Convention Against Torture (CAT) on Monday 5 May 2014. 
Rape
and other sexual abuse of children have been rife in the Catholic Church for
decades, if not centuries. NGOs, including Child Rights International Network
(CRIN) and the World Organization Against Torture (OMCT), argue that rape and
other sexual abuse of children committed by or with the acquiescence of Holy
See officials amount to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, and
as such are a violation of CAT. 
CRIN
and OMCT presented their joint alternative report to the UNCAT committee
members today (2 May) just prior to the Holy See’s review on Monday, followed
by a lunch briefing with other NGOs and survivors of sexual abuse committed by
Catholic clerics.
CRIN
and OMCT believe that, by acquiescing to rape and other forms of sexual abuse
committed worldwide by Catholic clergy and others operating under the Holy
See’s authority, the Holy See has failed its duties to prevent torture and
other acts of ill-treatment within its jurisdiction, thereby violating CAT. 
Although the Holy See has
started to recognise the seriousness and scale of the abuse, this has not
resulted in clear action to ensure that allegations of child sexual abuse are
reported publicly and investigated and prosecuted by law enforcement
authorities. 
During the private meeting
with the Committee, CRIN and OMCT emphasised that the Holy See’s failure to
exercise due diligence to prevent, investigate, prosecute and punish
perpetrators has and continues to facilitate and enable Catholic clergy and
others under its authority to commit acts of rape and other forms of sexual
abuse with impunity. 
As a final recommendation,
CRIN and OMCT urged the Committee to call on the Holy See to:
            •           Disclose all information held by
the Holy See on cases of rape and other forms of sexual abuse by clerics and
others under its authority to the Committee and the public, including the measures
the Holy See has taken in response to these cases, while protecting the privacy
of victims;
            •           Immediately
remove all known and suspected child
sexual abusers from service, report
the matter to the relevant law enforcement authorities, and cooperate with such authorities in
their investigation and prosecution; 
            •           Amend the Canon Law in order
for child sexual abuse, including rape, to be considered a crime and not a
“delict against the moral”, and repeal
all provisions which may impose an obligation of silence on victims and all
those that become aware of such crimes;
            •           Establish
clear rules, mechanisms and procedures for mandatory
reporting of all suspected cases of rape and other forms of sexual abuse to
law enforcement authorities, and ensure that all persons under the authority of
the Holy See are made aware of their reporting obligations and of the fact
that, in case of conflict, these obligations prevail over Canon Law provisions;
and
            •           Create
a publicly accessible complaints procedure
and a compensation scheme for
victims of sexual abuse, including rape, by clerics and others under the
authority of the Holy See.
UNCAT’s review of the Holy
See on 5 May comes during the Committee’s 52nd session, held in Geneva,
Switzerland. All official documentation, including alternative reports by other
NGOs, can be found on UNCAT’s session page. 
The UNCAT review comes
shortly after another UN human rights body, the Committee on the Rights of the
Child, rebuked the Holy See for its
handling of the child sexual abuse scandal and its violation of children’s
rights earlier this year. 
The review will start at
10am (Geneva time) and can be followed live on the treaty body webcast: www.treatybodywebcast.org. NGOs will also be reporting
from Geneva using Twitter - follow #VaticanAccountability. 
Other States under review
during UNCAT’s 52nd session are: Cyprus, Lithuania, Montenegro, Sierra Leone,
Thailand, Uruguay and Guinea (without a State report). 

For further
information, please contact:
OMCT, Ms
Carolina Barbara, Child Rights Coordinator, Tel. +41 (0) 22 809 49 39, Email: cb@omct.org
Notes to editors
Child
Rights International Network (CRIN) is a global children’s rights advocacy
network. Established in 1995, we press for rights - not charity - and campaign
for a genuine shift in how governments and societies view and treat children.
We are based in the UK, but link to nearly 3,000 organisations that between
them work on children’s rights in every country in the world and rely on our
publications, research and information sharing. CRIN envisions a world in which
every child enjoys all their human rights guaranteed by the United Nations,
regional organisations and national governments. 
CRIN
launched a campaign earlier this year to end sexual violence in
religious institutions.
The
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), created in 1985 and based in Geneva,
is today the main coalition of NGOs fighting against torture, summary
executions, enforced disappearances and all other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment. With 311 affiliated organisations in its SOS-Torture Network and
many tens of thousands correspondents in every country, OMCT is the most
important network of non-governmental organisations working for the protection
and the promotion of human rights in the world. 