Mauritania:  Mauritania: ill-treatment, torture and imprisonment of Haratine women
August 22, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Mauritania / 2000 / AugustMauritania: Mauritania: ill-treatment, torture and imprisonment of Haratine womenVIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN Case MRT 220800.VAW  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Mauritania.   Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received information from SOS-Esclaves Mauritanie, a member of the OMCT network, regarding impunity for the torture and physical and psychological ill-treatment of 31 women and 52 men (see also Case MRT 220800).  13 persons were also detained during incidents (although later released on 27th July) which took place on 17th and 18th June 2000, in Brakna, the administrative centre of Dar El Barka, when forces of order intervened during a peaceful demonstration by the Haratine people (descendants of slaves).  The demonstration protested against the actions of the Governor of the Brakna region who gave his brother a large concession of the lands of the Haratine people for development.    SOS-Esclaves Mauritanie has reported the following cases of torture, ill-treatment and imprisonment: 1.	Marieme Mint Mamlouk : temporarily imprisoned for four days, tortured and still bares the scars of this torture. 2.	El Moumna Mint Mousse : hit and manhandled in her home in Zem-Zem, and is currently paralysed. 3.	Mahjouba Mint El Marsa : tortured violently and dragged through the sand.  4.	Khyarhoum Mint Mamlouk : imprisoned for four days and tortured with rope, still bares the scars of torture.  5.	Khadejetou Mint Thioulèye : imprisoned for four days and tortured.  Still bares the injuries of this torture.  6.	Khdeija Mint N’Deya : (65 years old and handicapped) she was molested and tortured.  7.	Taama Mint N’deye : hit, tortured and dragged through the sand.  8.	Chaara Mint El Marsa: (breastfeeding a child) tortured and ill-treated.   9.	Mahjouba Mint El Marsa : tortured, her mouth filled with sand.  10.	Mouah Mint Memlouk : tortured and hit violently. 11.	Guejmoule Mint Ndeya (spouse of Kebadi Ould N’deya) :hit and chased from her home in Zem-Zem. 12.	Zeinebou Mint Abdallahi : hit, ill-treated and covered with sand.  13.	Mouh Mint Mahamdjibi : violently hit, still in shock : problems with sensations, headaches, insomnia.  14.	Khdeija Mint Mahamdjibi : hit and dragged through the sand.   15.	Fatimetou Mint Boïbou : tortured and her property looted. 16.	Fatimetou Mint Mahmoud (pregnant) : tortured, dragged through the sand, jewellery stolen, still suffers traumas from this treatment.  17.	Oumrana Mint Boïbou : tortured, home looted, lost 6 sheep.  18.	Barrak Mint Moïsse : violently tortured and jewellery confiscated.  19.	Fatimetou Mint Amoïgine : tortured, jewellery confiscated, house looted. 20.	Loueïne mint Nagi : tortured, dragged through the sand and had an abortion.  21.	Nagia Mint Sneïba : violently tortured, still in shock : various behavioural problems.  22.	Salma Mint Mohamed : tortured violently, still suffers.  23.	Neina Mint Boïbe (9 months pregnant ) : tortured, mouth filled with sand, jewellery confiscated, house looted, is in a serious condition.  24.	Youma Mint Boubacar : having just given birth, she was tortured, she is still ill.  25.	Neïssane Mint Mohamed : hit, her jewellery confiscated and her house looted. 26.	Aminetou Mint Dal’gha , blind, she was hit to the point of losing her memory.  27.	Marième Mint Dal’gha : hit, tortured and dragged through the sand.  28.	Bombi : violently struck and jewellery confiscated.   29.	Khadjetou Mint Belkhère : ill-treated, tortured and jewellery confiscated.  30.	Barrak Mint Boubacar (pregnant) : beat her husband in front of her causing her serious depression.  31.	Ekhdeïja Mint Abdaallahi : (elderly lady), hit and tortured, and forced to eat sand.    The reasons for the protest still stand as the brother of the Governor of the Brakna region is continuing construction on these lands, notably a water reserve.  The community has sent a letter of protest to the prefect of Boghé, Minister of the Interior, and President of the National Assembly and Senate.  They have indicated that the doctors still refuse to examine the injuries caused by police violence and that the Police Commissary, the Prosecutor and examining Magistrate have refused to accept their claims.  Actions requested  Please write to the authorities in Mauritania urging them to:  i.	guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of these women and provide adequate medical treatment for all injuries sustained and ensure reparations and compensation;  ii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into all allegations of torture, ill-treatment and looting of property, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law;  iii.	guarantee the rights of all Haratine peoples and put an end to such incidents of ill-treatment;  iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  President of the Republic, Son Excellence Monsieur le Président Maaouiya Ould Sid 'Ahmed Taya, Président de la République, La Présidence -BP 184, Nouakchott – Mauritania.  Fax : +222 2 52406 or +222 2 59801.  Minister of the Interior, Monsieur Dah Ould Abdel Jelil, Ministre de l'Intérieur, des Postes et des Télécommunications BP 195, Nouakchott – Mauritania.  Fax : +222 2 53661  Minister of Justice, Monsieur Mohamed Salem Ould Merzoug, Ministre de la Justice, Ministère de la Justice - BP 350, Nouakchott – Mauritania.  Fax : +222 2 57002 or +222 2 54995  Public Prosecutor, Mohamed Yeslem Ould Jidimou, Procureur de la République, Palais de Justice, Nouakchott - Mauritania Telegrams: Procureur République, Nouakchott, Mauritania.  Monsieur El Hassen Ould Maouloud, Wali du Brakna, Aleg, Mauritania.  Monsieur le Commissaire Mohamed el Kory Ould Jiyid, Commissaire de Police, Direction Regionale de la Surete du Brakna, Aleg, Mauritania.  Geneva, 22nd August 2000.  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 