Bangladesh:  Joint Oral Statement delivered at the 24th session of the Human Rights Council under Item 6: Bangladesh UPR Report consideration
September 20, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Bangladesh / 2013 / SeptemberBangladesh: Joint Oral Statement delivered at the 24th session of the Human Rights Council under Item 6: Bangladesh UPR Report consideration 
UNITED NATIONSHUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL
24th session
Item 6: Bangladesh UPR Report consideration
 
Joint oral intervention delivered by the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), in the
framework of their joint programme, the Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders
 
September 20, 2013
 
Check against delivery
 
Mr. President,
 
OMCT and FIDH, within the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, welcome the pledges of the Government of Bangladesh to support most
of the UPR recommendations, including those on the investigation of allegations
of human rights violations by security forces and the prosecution of their
perpetrators; and on the protection of human rights defenders and the guarantee
that they are allowed to work without hindrance, intimidation or harassment.
 
However, OMCT and FIDH express their deep concern about the crackdown on
critical voices in the country, including human rights defenders, who are
judicially harassed, threatened or even killed, as was the case of labour
leader Aminul Islam in April 2012, whose murderers have still not been
identified.
 
Our organisations denounce in particular the current harassment against
Odhikar, a prominent human rights NGO that has been under constant watch by the
Government since its inception. Since August 10, 2013, Mr. Adilur Rahman
Khan, Secretary of Odhikar and a member of OMCT General Assembly, is
arbitrarily detained, in relation to a fact-finding report
issued by Odhikar on the
killing of 61 people during an operation by security forces against Hefazat-e Islam activists
in Dhaka.
A charge sheet was
subsequently filed against Mr. Khan as well as against Odhikar's Director Mr. Nasiruddin Elan for “distorting images” and “publishing a
fabricated report”, under Section 57 of the Information and Communication Technology Act, in relation to
Odhikar’s report. An arrest warrant was issued against Mr. Elan. Mr. Khan’s trial was scheduled to start yesterday with the framing of
charges, but as a Prosecutor had not yet been appointed, the Tribunal reported
the hearing to September 25, 2013.
 
The judicial harassment against Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan and Mr. Nasiruddin Elan merely aims at intimidating and
silencing them, Odhikar and more generally any critics of the Government. We
call upon the Government of Bangladesh to release Mr. Khan immediately and unconditionally as his detention is
arbitrary, and to put an end to the harassment against Odhikar.
 
Mr. President,
 
Our organisations also regret that the Government of Bangladesh did not
support the recommendation calling for an independent and impartial commission
of inquiry on alleged cases of forced disappearances or extrajudicial
executions. 
 
OMCT and FIDH finally urge the Government of Bangladesh to extend an
invitation to the UN Special Rapporteurs on the Situation of Human Rights
Defenders and on Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary Executions, who have both
requested a country visit.
 
Thank you Mr. President. 