Iran:  Iran: Imprisonment / Freedom of Expression
May  3, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2000 / MayIran: Iran: Imprisonment / Freedom of ExpressionURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY  IRN 002 / 0005 / OBS 032 Imprisonment / Freedom of Expression IRAN 3 May 2000  The Observatory for the protection of human rights defenders, joint programme of the FIDH and the OMCT, urges you to intervene immediately regarding the following situation in Iran :  Brief Description of the situation :  The Observatory has been informed of the arrest of Mehrangiz Kar, lawyer and defender of human rights, and of Chala Lahidji, head of a publishing house.  According to information from the Human Rights Defence League in Iran (HRDLI), member of the FIDH, these two militants were summoned on April 29, 2000 by the Revolutionary Tribunal of Tehran.  The women were charged with ²anti-Islamic activities² and ²actions against national security² for their participation in a controversial conference held at the beginning of April in Berlin.  This conference was at the origin of a wave of arrests of Iranian reformers.  On April 25, the Observatory intervened following the arrest, for the same motives, of Akbar Ganji, writer, journalist, and head of the daily newspaper Fatah (See appeal IRN 001/0004/OBS030).  The two feminists were placed under arrest following their interrogation.  This series of interrogations follows the closing of sixteen liberal newspapers during the last week in April and the arrest or charge of many journalists who share the ideals of the reformers.  The Observatory is gravely concerned by this wave of arrests which broke out in a tense political context coinciding with the second round of legislative elections held on May 5.  The Observatory believes that the arrest of Mehrangiz Kar and Chala Lahidji are linked to their actions in favour of human rights and the respect of democracy.  Action Requested :  Please write the Iranian authorities to request that they :  i.	immediately release unconditionally Mehrangiz Kar and Chala Lahidji ii.	conform to the measures of the Declaration of Human Rights Defenders adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on December 9, 1998, and notably to Article 6 which stipulates that “Everyone has the right, individually and in association with others [...], to publish, impart or disseminate to others views, information and knowledge on all human rights and fundamental freedoms” iii.	more generally, guarantee the effective respect of fundamental human rights and freedoms in accordance with the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and international and regional Pacts and Covenants that bind Iran.   Addresses  President of the Islamic Republic His excellency Mr Khatami, Fax : 98 21 67 36 57 // 64 66 45	E mail : khatami@president.ir  The Iranian Embassy in your countries  Paris-Genève, 3rd May 2000  The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need. 1998 Human Rights Prize of The French Republic.  To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: Fax :  +33 (0) 1 55 80 83 92   Tel:  FIDH +33 (0) 1 48 55 20 11       OMCT: +41 (0) 22 809 49 39 E.Mail : observatoire@iprolink.ch 