Egypt:  Continued arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of human rights defenders Ms. Yara Sallam, Ms. Sana Seif and 22 protesters
July  1, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2014 / JulyEgypt: Continued arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of human rights defenders Ms. Yara Sallam, Ms. Sana Seif and 22 protestersARABIC VERSION4 pages / 165 KB​













New information
EGY 002 / 0614 / OBS 058.2
Arbitrary detention / Judicial harassment /
Obstacles
to freedom of peaceful assembly
Egypt
July
1, 2014
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and
requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Egypt.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by the Egyptian Initiative for
Personal Rights (EIPR) about the continued arbitrary detention and judicial
harassment of human rights defenders Ms. Yara Sallam, Transitional
Justice Officer at EIPR, and Ms. Sana Seif, a member of the “No to Military Trials
for Civilians” movement and sister of the imprisonment blogger Mr. Alaa
Abdel Fattah, as well as 22 protesters[1].

 
According to the information received, on June 29, 2014, the trial
against Ms. Yara Sallam and Ms. Sana Seif, together with 21 other individuals
who had peacefully protested for the repeal of Law No.107 for 2013 on
demonstrations and public rallies, started[2].

 
Though the session was due to take place at the Heliopolis Courthouse, at the time set for the start
of the session lawyers and family members were informally told that the hearing
of the case would transferred to the Police Academy inside the high security
Tora Prison. They had to rush across the city to
attend the trial. Access to the courtroom was heavily restricted:
families of the detainees were denied access and defence lawyers and
journalists faced difficulties to access the room. One journalist who tried to
take a photograph had his equipment confiscated and was removed from the courtroom.

 
During the hearing, the defence lawyers requested to examine and verify
the validity of the evidence presented against the defendants by the
prosecution including audio-visual material on the demonstration. The court
granted this request, however the request for provisional release of the
defendants on bail was rejected by the court. 
 
The judge closed the hearing session and left the courtroom without
informing the lawyers about the date of the next hearing. The Court's security
guards then told the lawyers that the next hearing was scheduled on September
13, 2014.
 
The Observatory is highly concerned about the handling of the case by
the judicial authorities and the numerous breaches to the right to fair trial,
including the right to defence and the right to the publicity of the debates.
 
The Observatory is further concerned by the lack of evidence and
inconsistencies in the police reports on which the charges of damaging property
are based. According to EIPR, a police report claims that a police vehicle was
damaged at 9:30pm on June 21, 2014 while most defendants had been arrested
earlier. Furthermore, no weapons or other items were seized from the defendants
or presented as evidence. 
 
The Observatory also notes that the 23 defendants in detention were
supposed to appear before the court on June 25 after the expiry of their
four-day detention. However, the defendants were not brought to court, and the
Prosecution instead issued an indictment order, before the defendants had a
chance to challenge their pre-trial detention before an independent judicial
body. 
 
The Observatory recalls that the restrictive protest law has been used
by the authorities as a tool to imprison human rights defenders. This
controversial law bans gatherings of 10 or more people without a permit issued
by the authorities. 
 
The Observatory welcomes the call
of the ACHPR Special Rapporteur on Human Rights Defenders in Africa to immediately release Ms. Yara Sallam and all detained protesters, and
to conduct a thorough and impartial investigation into the situation. 
 
The Observatory expresses its deepest concern regarding the ongoing
arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Ms. Yara Sallam, Ms. Sana Seif
and the other above-mentioned protesters, which seem to aim only at preventing
them from carrying out their peaceful human rights activities, and calls upon
the Egyptian judicial authorities to immediately and unconditionally release
them. 
 
Background information:
 
On June 21, 2014, the police dispersed by using tear gas a peaceful march that
was organised in the Heliopolis neighbourhood in Cairo to demand the repeal of
the Law 107 of 2013 on demonstrations and public rallies (the “Anti-Protest
Law”) as well as the release of those detained under said law. In this
framework, the police arrested more than 30 individuals, including Ms. Yara
Sallam and her cousin Shehab Fakhry Ismail. It should be highlighted that the two were picked up in
the vicinity of the protest between 7 and 8 pm by security forces as they were
buying drinks from a local kiosk and not while participating in any
demonstration. 
 
Some of the detainees reported insults and ill-treatment, including
beatings by “muwatinin shurafa” (plain-clothed police collaborators) during and
after the arrest . Those arrested were questioned without the presence of their
lawyers, mostly individually, by men in civilian dress who did not introduce
themselves or clarify their official positions. The arrestees were asked
whether they participated in the protest and were questioned about their
political affiliations and opinions about the protest law. According to
testimonies, officials pressured them into confessing their participation and
threatened to charge them with belonging to the banned Muslim Brotherhood
and/or the 6th of April Movement. Later the same day, eight of the arrestees
were released without charge, including Ms. Sallam's cousin. On June 22, 2014,
24 were presented before the Prosecutor’s office.
 
During her interrogation, Ms. Sallam was questioned about the nature of
her work and about EIPR's management.
 
On June 23, 2014, the Heliopolis Prosecution Office ordered the
detention until June 25, 2014 of Ms. Yara Sallam, Ms. Sana Seif as well as 21
other individuals on charges of “breaching the protest law” under the
“Anti-Protest Law, “sabotaging public properties”, “possession of inflammable
materials” and “taking part in showing off force with the objective of
terrorizing the public” for their alleged participation in a peaceful march.
Another individual was released on medical grounds[3].
 
On June 24, 2014, the two women human rights defenders as well as five
women protesters were transferred to Qanatir Prison, 15 male detainees to Tora
Prison, and one juvenile to Al-Marg juvenile prison. This followed the
extension by the prosecution of the detention of these 23 individuals on June
23, 2014 for four days, as well as the release on bail of another one on the
same day.
 
On June 25, 2014, the Heliopolis Public Prosecution transferred the case
to the Heliopolis Misdemeanor Court. It mentioned 12 provisions in the
indictment order: articles 162, 361, 375 (bis), 375 (bisA) of the Penal Code,
articles 1 to 4 of Law 10 for 1914 on Gatherings; and articles 7, 8, 19, 21 of
Law No.107 for 2013 on demonstrations and public rallies. These provisions
include: “participating in an unauthorised demonstration whose aim was to stop
the implementation of the law and influence the effectiveness of the public
authorities during the carrying out of their work”; “organising a demonstration
without prior notice as stipulated by the law and participating in a
demonstration that breached and threatened public security and the interests of
citizens and disrupted transportation and transgressed public and private
property”; “using force and violence to terrorise and intimidate citizens”; and
“deliberately destructing property owned by the aggrieved party as proven
through investigations”. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Egypt asking them to:
 
i.      Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
of Ms. Yara Sallam and Ms. Sana Seif, as well as the 22 protesters above-mentioned
and prosecuted for their alleged participation in said march and all human
rights defenders in Egypt;
 
ii.     Release Ms. Yara Sallam and Ms. Sana
Seif, as well as the 21 protesters prosecuted for their alleged
participation in said march
immediately and unconditionally, as well as all human rights defenders currently in detention, since their detention is arbitrary as it seems to only aim at curtailing
their human rights activities; 
 
iii.   Put an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level,
against Ms. Yara Sallam and Ms. Sana Seif, as well as the
22 protesters indicted for their alleged participation in
said march
and all human rights defenders in Egypt;
 
iv.    Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, in particular with:
-     
its Article 1, which
provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-     
its Article 5(a): “For
the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms,
everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, at the
national and international levels (a) To meet or assemble peacefully”
-     
its Article 6(a), which
foresees that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to participate in peaceful activities against violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms”;
-     
its Article 12.2, which
provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 
v.     Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Egypt.
 
Addresses
·      
President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, H.E. Abdel Fattah el-Sisi,
Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 23901998
·      
Prime Minister, Mr. Ibrahim Mehleb, Magles El Shaab Street, Kasr El Aini
Street, Cairo, Egypt. Fax: + 202 2735 6449 / 27958016. Email: primemin@idsc.gov.eg
·      
Minister of the Interior, General Mohamed Ibrahim Moustafa, Ministry of
the Interior, El-Sheikh Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: moi1@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2579 2031 / 2794
5529
·      
Minister of Justice, Mr. Mahmoud Saber, Ministry of Justice, Magles El
Saeb Street, Wezaret Al Adl, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2795 8103
·      
Public Prosecutor, Counsellor Hisham Barakat Dar al-Qadha al-Ali, Ramses
Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 2577 4716
·      
Mr. Mohamed Fayeq, President of the National Council For Human Rights,
Fax: + 202 25747497 / 25747670. Email: nchr@nchr.org.eg
·      
H.E. Ms. Wafaa Bassim,
Ambassador, Permanent
Mission of Egypt to the United Nations in Geneva, 49 avenue Blanc, 1202 Genève,
Switzerland, Email: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41 22 738 44 15
·       Embassy of Egypt in Brussels, 19 avenue de l’Uruguay, 1000 Brussels,
Belgium, Fax: +32 2 675.58.88; Email: embassy.egypt@skynet.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Egypt in
your respective country.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, July 1,
2014
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the
protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in
their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25
18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49
39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1] Mohamed Ahmed Youssef Saad, Bassam Mohamed Aly El Saed, Ahmed Samir Mahmoud Mohamed, Islam Tawfik Mohamed Hassan, Yasser Samir Fadel Sayed, Ibrahim Ahmed ElSaed AbdelRahaman, Salwa Aboud Aly Mehrez, Karim Moustafa Yassin, Islam Mohamed AbdelHamid Mohamed, Nahed Sherif Abdelhamid ElSaed, Fekrya Mohamed Mohamed, Mohamed Anwar Massoud, Hanan Moustafa Ahmed Soliman, Moataz Mahmoud Mansour Ragheb, Mohamed ElSaed AlSayed, Ahmed Mohamed Abdelhamid Mohamed, Mahmoud Hesham Hassanien AbdelAziz, Mo'men Mohamed Radwan, Mohamed ElSayed Mohamed, Moustafa Mohamed Ibrahim, Samar Ibrahim Mahmoud Ibrahim and Amr Ahmed Muhammad Mahmoud. Mr. Amr
Ahmed Muhammad Mahmoud was provisionally released on medical grounds.


[2] One of the protesters is a minor and will be
prosecuted separately.


[3]       Amr Ahmed Muhammad Mahmoud. 