Press Release - Four reports on violence against women
January 13, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / 2004 / JanuaryPress Release - Four reports on violence against womenPRESS RELEASE  The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) launches its latest four publications on violence against women in Costa Rica, France, Kenya and Morocco   January 13, 2004  The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) is pleased to announce the publication of four reports on violence against women, entitled “Violence Against Women in Costa Rica,” “Violence Against Women in France,” “Violence Against Women in Kenya,” and “Violence Against Women in Morocco.” These four reports were submitted as alternative country reports to the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) during 2003.   In submitting alternative reports to the CEDAW, OMCT seeks to provide factual information concerning violence against women, including torture, in a specific country as well as to highlight the laws, both penal and civil, of the States concerned, which discriminate against women or which, without being discriminatory as such, become so through their application. Power differentials between men and women, asserting the superiority of men, have led to the domination of and discrimination against women, which in turn makes women potentially vulnerable to violence.   Violence against women continues to be a global epidemic, which, despite much international attention, has not decreased to any significant degree. Women suffer from violence at the hands of family members, members of the community and State agents. Although States are obligated under international law to prevent, investigate and punish all forms of violence against women, regardless of whether the perpetrator is a public or private figure, States rarely fulfill this duty adequately.  In all of the countries examined by OMCT for its CEDAW reports in 2003, domestic violence is widespread. In spite of the widespread nature of this human rights violation, women in Costa Rica, France, Kenya and Morocco rarely report such violence, as the topic is still taboo in these nations. The trends revealed in these four reports reflect much wider global obstacles in combating violence against women committed in the family. Cultural assumptions that domestic violence is a private, family matter influence how complaints about such violence are handled by police and judicial personnel, making it even less likely that women will be willing to come forward. The OMCT reports find that the respective governments are not doing enough to prevent, investigate and punish domestic violence and are thus, failing to adequately protect women’s human rights.  The four OMCT reports also provide detailed information on particular marginalized groups of women, such as migrant women, women refugees, and trafficking victims. Women from these marginalized groups experience violence in particular ways, which require targeted solutions. For example, in Kenya, women refugees are extremely vulnerable to sexual violence and the State has not demonstrated a commitment to bringing perpetrators of sexual violence against refugee women to justice, regardless of whether they are state agents or private individuals. In France, immigrant women victims of domestic violence are often unable to access services and legal remedies due to language difficulties as well as the danger of losing their residency permit. Also, in Costa Rica, trafficking in women and girls for sexual purposes is rampant and there is no specific law criminalizing trafficking. Similarly, in Morocco, many girls have been trafficked and forced into domestic labour where they are vulnerable to physical and sexual abuse, but Morocco has not specifically criminalized trafficking.   Violence against women perpetrated by State agents is also a serious concern, whether the violence is perpetrated in detention centers, prisons, refugee camps or other places. State agents use sexual violence, including rape, and sexual harassment to exert power over women. Often, these State agents enjoy impunity while the women suffer in silence, afraid to come forward with a complaint. When women are arrested or otherwise in detention, it is extremely important that they only be searched by female law enforcement officers. Furthermore, the State is under an obligation to identify, investigate and punish all perpetrators of violence against women.   Each of the reports ends with conclusions and recommendations intended as tools for the UN human rights mechanisms, States, human rights NGOs, women's organisations, members and non-members of the OMCT SOS-Torture network and anyone concerned by violence against women at all levels. The reports also include the Concluding Observations of CEDAW concerning these States.  Violence Against Women in Costa Rica, OMCT, 2003, ISBN 2-88477-066-6, pp. 46.  Violence Against Women in France, OMCT, 2003, ISBN 2-88477-064-X, pp.39.  Violence Against Women in Kenya, OMCT, 2003, ISBN 2-88477-065-8, pp. 38.  Violence Against Women in Morocco, OMCT, 2003, ISBN 2-88477-068-2, pp. 47.  Copies available from OMCT at a cost of 10 CHF.  For copies of the reports or for further information concerning OMCT’s Violence Against Women Programme, please contact Carin Benninger-Budel, cbb@omct.org or at +41 22 809 4939. 