Iran:  Sentencing of Union board member and mass arrests of unionists
July  6, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2012 / JulyIran: Sentencing of Union board member and mass arrests of unionists
URGENT 
APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
 
New information
IRN 003 / 0712 / OBS 066
Sentencing 
/ Raid
 / Arbitrary detentions
Iran
July 
6, 2012
 
 
The 
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of 
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation 
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent 
intervention in the following situation in 
Iran. 

 
New 
information:
 
The 
Observatory has been informed by the Iranian League for the Defence of Human 
Rights (LDDHI) 
of the upholding on appeal of the sentence against Mr. Reza 
Shahabi, 
Treasurer and board member of the Syndicate of Workers of Tehran and Suburbs Bus 
Company (Sherkat-e Vahed).
 
On 
July 
3, 2012, 
it was reported that Branch 36 of the Appeals 
Court 
in Tehran 
had informed Mr. Reza Shahabi's lawyer that his first instance sentence of 
six-year imprisonment, five years of ban on union activities and 70 million 
rials cash fine had been upheld on appeal. This information was communicated to 
him only one month after receiving the bill of defence filed by the same lawyer 
to object the first instance sentence. 
Mr. Shahabi remains currently detained in Section 350 of Evin 
Prison.
 
In 
addition, on June 
15 2012, 
a large number of armed security agents attacked the 6th General Assembly of the 
Coordinating Committee to Help Form Workers’ Organisations (CCHFW)[1], 
fired shots, intimidated the neighbours and arrested more than 60 people 
participating in the meeting, including a large number of members of the 
Coordinating Committee and some other unionists. 
 
In 
a letter dated March 
5, 2012, 
the organisers had asked the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs for a meeting 
place to hold their General Assembly, but the ministry had rejected their 
request on March 
7, 2012. 
They had thus no other choice but to hold their meeting in a private house. Most 
of the detainees were released on bail on the same day or on subsequent 
days.
 
Two 
persons still remain in detention to date: they are Mr. Jalil 
Mohammadi 
and Mr. Alireza 
Asgari. 
Both are detained in Rajaishahr prison, Karaj.
 
Furthermore, 
on July 
1, 2012, 
Mr. Pedram 
Nasrollahi, 
another member of the CCHFW, was tried in relation with his union activities by 
the Islamic Revolution Court in the city of Sanandaj. 
Mr. Nasrollahi had been detained on March 
8, 2012 
and released on bail on April 
24, 2012. 
He was reportedly tried for membership in the CCHFW and his union activities. He 
had previously spent three months and 15 days in detention after an arrest in 
July 2008, and had been sentenced to 4 months' imprisonment in August 2010 on 
charges of "acting against national security" and "propaganda against the 
state".
 
Background 
information:
 
On 
April 
14, 2012, 
the lawyer of Mr. Reza Shahabi was informed that his client had been sentenced 
to six years in prison in first instance by Judge Abolghassem Salavati, of 
Branch 15 of the Islamic Revolution Court. Mr. Shahabi was convicted under 
charges of “propaganda against the regime” (one-year imprisonment) and 
“conspiracy against the national security” (five-year imprisonment). He was also 
banned from engaging in union activities for five years. Furthermore, he was 
condemned to a 70 million-rial fine (about 3,000 euros). In addition, although 
Mr. Shahabi’s state of health has deteriorated in custody, prison authorities 
have not granted him appropriate medical treatment.
 
In 
addition, several unionists are currently in detention or serving prison 
sentences for their union activities, including Messrs Ali 
Nejati, 
Shahrokh 
Zamani, 
Mohammad 
Jarrahi, 
Behnam 
Ebrahimzadeh, 
Rassoul 
Bodaghi, 
Mohammad 
Hosseini, 
Mehdi 
Farahi Shandiz, 
and Ali 
Akhavan. 
Many other unionists are free on bail, after various periods of detention and 
awaiting trial.
 
Actions 
requested:
 
Please 
write to the Iranian authorities and ask them to:
 
i.           
Release 
immediately and unconditionally those detained, as their detention only aims at 
sanctioning his human rights activities;
ii.          
Guarantee 
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of the human rights defenders 
mentioned above
as 
well as all human rights defenders and their families in 
Iran;
 
iii.        
 
iv.        
Put 
an end to any kind of harassment - including at the judicial level - against 
the human rights 
defenders mentioned above and more generally against all human 
rights defenders in Iran;
 
v.         
Conform 
in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders, adopted on December 
9, 1998 
by the United Nations General Assembly, in particular:
-       
its 
article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually or in 
association with others, to promote the protection and realization of human 
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international 
levels”;
-       
its 
article 5.b, which states that “everyone 
has the right, individually and in association with others, at the national and 
international levels, (…) to form, join and participate in non-governmental 
organizations, associations or groups”;
-       
its 
article 12.2 which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to 
ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and 
in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, 
de 
facto 
or de 
jure 
adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence 
of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present 
Declaration”; 
 
vi.     Ensure in all circumstances 
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with 
international human rights standards and international instruments ratified by 
Iran.
 
Addresses:
 
·   
Leader 
of the Islamic Republic, His Excellency Ayatollah Sayed Ali Khamenei, The Office 
of the Supreme Leader, Shahid Keshvardoost St., Jomhuri Eslami Ave., Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, E-Mail: info_leader@leader.ir, Faxes: + 98 21 649, + 
98 21 649 / 21 774 2228, info_leader@leader.ir
·   
President 
Mr. Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, the Presidency, Palestine 
Avenue, Azerbaijan 
Intersection, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic 
of Iran, 
Fax: + 98 21 649 5880. E-Mail: dr-ahmadinejad@president.ir
·   
Head 
of the Judiciary, His Excellency Ayatollah Sadeq Larijani, Ministry of Justice, 
c/o Public relations Office, Number 4, 2 Azizi Street, Vali Asr Ave., above 
Pasteur Street intersection, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: +98 21 879 
6671 / +98 21 3 311 6567, Email: bia.judi@yahoo.com 
/ info@dadgostary-tehran.ir 
/ info@bia-judiciary.ir
·   
Minister 
of Foreign Affairs, Ali Akbar Salehi, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Av, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: +98-21-66743149 
·   
Secretary 
General, High Council for Human Rights, Mr. Mohammed Jayad Larijani, [Care of] 
Office of the Head of the Judicary, Pasteur St, Vali Asr Ave, South of Serah-e 
Jomhouri, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Email: info@humanrights-iran.ir
·   
H.E. Mr. Seyed Mohammad Reza Sajjadi, Ambassador, Permanent 
Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Chemin du Petit-Saconnex 28, 1209 
Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7330203, Email: mission.iran@ties.itu.int
·   
Embassy 
of Iran 
in Brussels, 
15 a avenue Franklin Roosevelt, 1050 Bruxelles, 
Belgium, 
Fax: + 32 2 762 39 15. Email: iran-embassy@yahoo.com

 
Please 
also write to the diplomatic representations of 
Iran 
in your respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, 
July 
6, 2012
 
Kindly 
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your 
reply.
 
The Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the 
protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in 
their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency 
line:
·         
E-mail: 
Appeals@fidh-omct.org

·         
Tel 
and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·        
Tel 
and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29 