Sudan:  Sudan: Arrest of Mr. Shamseldin Idries Al-amin and Mr. Abdelkariem Mohamed Yahia
January 24, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2005 / JanuarySudan: Sudan: Arrest of Mr. Shamseldin Idries Al-amin and Mr. Abdelkariem Mohamed YahiaCase SDN 240105 Arbitrary Detention / Torture / Death in detention  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information concerning the following situation in Sudan.   Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudan Organisation Against Torture (SOAT), a member of the OMCT network, that on 10th September 2004, Shamseldin Idries Al-amin, 30 years old, from Nuba mountains, an accountant and member of the Popular National Congress (PNC) Party, and Abdelkariem Mohamed Yahia, a political activist and member of the PNC, were arrested in Al-khilaila village, north of Omdurman, and taken to the political section of the National Security Agency (NSA) offices in Khartoum North and detained.  According to eyewitness accounts, the men were severely tortured whilst in NSA custody and Mr. Shamseldin Idries Al-amin allegedly died from this torture. On the evening of 10th September, police officers arrived at Mr. Shamseldin’s home and requested that his father accompany them to the police station where he was informed that his son had died of food poisoning whilst detained by the NSA. The NSA claim that Mr. Shamseldin fell ill from food poisoning and transferred him to Khartoum hospital for medical treatment where he subsequently died.  Mr. Shamseldin’s family retrieved his body from the Forensics Department which had carried out an autopsy on the body. Although the family were not shown the autopsy report, they stated that the body had broken arms and other injuries consistent with torture.   On 26th September 2004, Mr. Shamseldin’s family began legal proceedings into his death and has just recently informed the Sudanese Organisation Against Torture of the above. According to the information received, the authorities have yet to open an investigation into the death of Mr. Shamseldin.  Mr. Abdelkariem Mohamed Yahia is still in detention in NSA offices in Khartoum North.  The International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its grave concern over the alleged death under torture of Shamseldin Idries Al-amin and is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Abdelkariem Mohamed Yahia.   Requested Action: Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:   i. guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Abdelkariem Mohamed Yahia;  ii. order his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times;  iii. order a thorough and impartial investigation into the death of Mr. Shamseldin Idries Al-amin, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply to them the civil, penal and/or administrative sanctions provided by law;  iv. guarantee that adequate reparation is awarded to the victim’s family;  v. order a thorough and impartial investigation into the torture of Mr. Abdelkariem Mohamed Yahia, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply to them the civil, penal and/or administrative sanctions provided by law;  vi. guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms  throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international humanitarian law and human rights standards.   Addresses: His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, President' s Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 783223  Mr. Ali Mohamed Osman Yassin, Minister of Justice and Attorney General, Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 788941  Mr. Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affair, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 779383   Dr. Abdelmuneim Osman Mohamed Taha, Advisory Council for Human Rights, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 770883  His Excellency Ambassador Mr. Mohamed Al- Hassan Ahmed Al-Haj, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 335, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 731 26 56, +41 22 716 19 70, E-mail: mission.sudan@ties.itu.int.  Please also write to the embassies of Sudan in your respective country.   Geneva, 24th January 2005  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 