Thailand:  Thai human rights defender and editor Somyot files an appeal
April  4, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2013 / AprilThailand: Thai human rights defender and editor Somyot files an appeal

Paris-Geneva, April 4,
2013. The International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), in the framework of the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, urge the Court
of Appeal to review the conviction of Thai human rights defender and labour
activist Mr. Somyot Prueksakasemsuk as soon as possible in conformity with
international human rights standards.
 
On April 1, 2013, Mr. Somyot
Prueksakasemsuk filed an
appeal against his conviction as well as a bail application. The court should
review the bail application and the conviction as a matter of urgency. April
30, 2013 will mark the two-year anniversary of Somyot's detention. Somyot was
arrested on April 30, 2011, five days after he launched a petition campaign to
collect 10,000 signatures required for a parliamentary review of lèse-majesté
law. 
 
The Observatory recalls
that on January 23, 2013, Somyot was
convicted by the Bangkok Criminal Court under Article 112 of the Thai Criminal
Code (the lèse majesté law) and sentenced to 10 years in prison on two
counts of violating the lèse majesté law plus the enactment of a one
year suspended sentence for a previous violation in 2009 of the Printing Act. 
 
Somyot
was convicted for allowing, as editor, the publication of two satirical
articles, written by someone else, in the magazine Voice of Taksin
(Voice of the Oppressed) that were deemed as “insulting” to the monarchy.
Thailand’s lèse-majesté law prohibits any word or act, which “defames,
insults, or threatens the King, the Queen, the Heir-apparent, or the Regent”.
This law places the country in contravention of its international legal
obligations to uphold international standards of freedom of expression. 
 
“This case is a test for Thailand's democracy.
Launching a petition to review the lèse-majesté
law and the publication of articles that were subsequently deemed to be
critical of the monarchy fall within the boundaries of opinions and speech
protected by Article 19 of the UDHR and ICCPR”,
said Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH President. “Furthermore,
an editor must not be held criminally accountable for articles posted by third
persons”.
 
“Somyot’s
application for bail should be reviewed on
the basis of objective criteria.
Pre-trial detention must be lawful, reasonable and necessary in all the
circumstances. The
authorities have still not provided an adequate justification for his continued detention or a legally sound explanation as to why less restrictive and non-custodial measures are not sufficient to prevent flight and non-tampering with evidence”, said Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary
General. 
 
The repetition
of the ill-defined concept
of “national security” as
a ground for rejecting
the bail applications of
those charged under the
lèse-majesté law reinforces
the perception that the
criminalization
of speech is increasingly
becoming a tool of
to legalise oppression in Thailand, including against those documenting human rights violations.
 
The
Observatory recalls that in August 2012, the United Nations Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention (UNWGAD) found the pre-trial detention of human rights
defender Mr. Somyot to be in contravention of international human rights law
and standards and called for his release. It added that the lèse majesté
laws in Thailand “suppress important debates on matters of public interests,
thus putting in jeopardy the right to freedom of opinion and expression”,
which is protected by Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (ICCPR) and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR).
The UNWGAD called not only for his release but also for compensation to be
provided to Somyot.
 
Accordingly,
the Observatory reiterates its call for Somyot’s
immediate release from detention and an end to the judicial harassment against
him.
 
Press Contact:
· FIDH: Audrey Couprie
/ Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18
· OMCT: Delphine Reculeau:
+ 41 22 809 49 39


Please join the Facebook campaign for
the release of Somyot:
https://www.facebook.com/media/set/?set=a.377638448989122.94336.122999694453000&type=3 