Korea, (South) Republic of:  Continuing judicial harassment of labour activists of the KCTU
May 23, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Korea, (South) Republic of / 2016 / MayKorea, (South) Republic of: Continuing judicial harassment of labour activists of the KCTU

New information
KOR 002 / 1215 / OBS
108.1
Arbitrary detention / Judicial harassment /
Obstacles to freedom of assembly
South Korea
May 23, 2016
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
South Korea.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by
reliable sources about the continuing judicial harassment of labour activists
of the Korean Confederation of Trade Unions (KCTU)[1], including the ongoing arbitrary detention
of Mr. Sang-gyun Han, President of KCTU, and a pending arrest warrant
against Ms. Young-joo Lee, Secretary General of KCTU. 
 
According to the information received, on
May 24, 2016, Mr. Han will face his third hearing in a trial for charges
related to his participation in demonstrations that took place between April
and November 2015[2]. Mr. Han has been in arbitrary detention
at the Seoul Detention Center since December 2015. His sentence is expected to
be handed down in July 2016. 
 
The Observatory has also received
information that KCTU’s Secretary General Ms. Young-joo Lee is currently under
self-imposed house arrest at the KCTU headquarters in Seoul in order to avoid
being arbitrarily detained by the police. Ms. Lee has been in hiding since
December 2015 when the authorities issued a warrant for her arrest for
participating in the demonstrations between April and November 2015. 
 
Mr. Han’s detention and trial and the arrest warrant
against Ms. Lee are part of the intensifying judicial harassment against labour
activists in South Korea. According to reports, 20 KCTU other members have also
been arrested by police in relation to their involvement in the November 2015
demonstration. 12 of them have been released on bail or suspended sentences,
while the other eight are awaiting the conclusion of their trials. In addition,
over 540 KCTU officers and members have been questioned by the police in
relation to their involvement in demonstrations, many of whom have had to pay
fines. 
 
The Observatory condemns the ongoing
repression, intimidation, and judicial harassment of labour leaders in South
Korea, and in particular the arbitrary detention of Mr. Sang-gyun Han and
arrest warrant against Ms. Young-joo Lee, which seem merely aimed at sanctioning
the peaceful human rights activities of labour unions and workers' rights
organisations. The Observatory calls upon the South Korean authorities to
immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Han and all other detained labour
leaders and human rights defenders and drop all charges against them, and to
cancel the arrest warrant against Ms. Lee.
 
The Observatory is concerned by the ongoing
attempts by the South Korean authorities to curtail freedom of association,
assembly, and expression, which seem to be aimed at undermining the legitimate
activities of human rights defenders. The Observatory recalls that the South
Korean authorities have the responsibility to ensure the protection of human
rights in general and of rights related to freedoms of expression, assembly and
association in particular.
 
Background information:
 
On December 10, 2015, Mr. Sang-gyun Han was
arrested by the police at the Jogye Temple in Seoul and was taken to the
Namdaemun Police Station, where he remained detained for questioning until
December 18 when he was transferred to the Seoul Detention Center. 
 
Mr. Han is accused of violating the
Assembly and Demonstration Act and the General Obstruction of Traffic (Article
185 of the Criminal Code) in relation to his participation in protests that
took place in April and May 2015 to commemorate the first anniversary of the
sinking of the Sewol Ferry and to call for an independent and transparent
investigation into the Sewol Ferry incident. After the protests in April and
May, Mr. Han was summoned by the police for questioning, but he refused to
appear for fear that he would be arbitrarily arrested. 
 
On June 23, 2015, an arrest warrant was
issued for Mr. Han, who subsequently went into hiding in the KCTU offices for
about five months. He later sought refuge at the Jogye Buddhist Temple in Seoul
city centre for almost one month, until he was finally arrested while leaving
the temple after the police had surrounded it and attempted to forcibly enter
the building.
 
Mr. Han began a hunger strike on November
30, 2015, in protest against the illegitimate arrest warrant issued against him
and the proposed labour reforms that would further limit workers' rights. He
continued the hunger strike while in detention, 
and after his health deteriorated significantly he ended his hunger
strike in early January 2016. In addition, on December 16, 2015, the General
Secretary of the International Trade Union Confederation for Asia and the
Pacific (ITUC-AP) was denied the right to visit Mr. Han at the police station.
Police stated that the visit was refused due to “worries about the possibility
of conspiracy and destruction of evidence”.
 
In response to the crackdown on labour
activists and attempts by the government to pass labour reforms that would
further limit workers' rights, KCTU organised strikes across the country on
December 16, 2015. Although there were no reported clashes with the police
during the strikes, the authorities declared the strike “illegal” and announced
that they would take strict measures against the organisers and participants.
The government has reacted similarly to strikes in the past, imposing criminal
and civil charges against union leaders and strike participants. During the
week of December 21-25, 2015, KCTU members organised another strike to denounce
the repression of the labour movement in South Korea. 
 
Actions requested:

The Observatory urges the authorities of South Korea to:
 
i. Guarantee the physical and psychological
integrity of Mr. Sang-gyun Han, Ms. Young-joo Lee, and all KCTU members, as
well as all peaceful protesters and human rights defenders in South Korea;
 
ii. Immediately and unconditionally release
Mr. Sang-gyun Han and all KCTU members, as well as all peaceful protesters and
human rights defenders in South Korea;
 
iii. Put an end to all acts of harassment,
including at the judicial level, against Mr. Sang-gyun Han, Ms. Young-joo Lee,
and all KCTU members, as well as all peaceful protesters and human rights
defenders in South Korea;
 
iv. Ensure in all circumstances that all
human rights defenders in South Korea are able to carry out their legitimate
activities including the organisation of strikes and peaceful assemblies
without any hindrance or fear of reprisals;
 
v. Conform with the provisions of the
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the
United Nations General Assembly, in particular: 
- its Article 1, which states that “everyone has
the right, individually or in association with others, to promote the
protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the
national and international levels” ;
- its Article 5 (a) which states that “everyone
has the right, individually and in association with others to meet or assemble
peacefully” ; and 
- its Article 12 which states that
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
participate in peaceful activities against violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms. The State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
present Declaration.”
 
vi. Ensure
in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by South Korea. 
 
Addresses: 
 
· 
Mrs. Park Geun-hye, President of the
Republic of Korea, 1 Cheongwadae-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-820, Republic of
Korea, Fax: +82 2770 1690
· 
Mr. Hwang Kyo-ahn, Prime Minister of the
Republic of Korea, 77-6 Sejongno, Jongno-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Fax: +
82-2-720-35 71
· 
Mr. Kim Hyun-Woong, Minister of Justice,
Government Complex-Gwacheon, Jungang-dong1, Gwacheon-si, Kyunggi-do, Tel:
02-2110-3178, Fax: 02-503-7118
· 
Mr. Yun Byung-se, Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 60, Sajik-ro 8-gil, Jongno-gu, Seoul,
Republic of Korea (110-787) Tel: +82-2-2100-2114, Fax: +82-2-2100-7999
· 
National Human Rights Commission of Korea,
Gumsegi Building, No. 16, Ulgiro 1-ga, Jung-gu, 100-842 Seoul, Republic of
Korea. Tel: +82 2 2125 97 00; Fax: +82-2-2125-9718. E-mail:
nhrc@humanrights.go.kr
· 
H.E. Choi Kyoung-lim, Permanent Mission of
the Republic of Korea to the United Nations, 1 Avenue de l'Ariana, Case Postale
42, 1211 Genève 20, Switzerland, Tel:(41-22) 748-0000, Fax: 748-0003. Email:
geneva.korea@mofa.go.kr.
·  H.E.
Chong-ghee Ahn, Ambassador of the Republic of Korea to the Kingdom of Belgium,
Chaussée de la Hulpe 173-175, 1170 Brussels(Watermael-Boitsfort), Belgium, Tel
: + 32 (0)2 675 5777, Fax : + 32 (0)2 675 5221/(0)2 662 2305
 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of
South Korea in your respective countries.
 





[1] KCTU is an organisation representing Korean workers
and the trade union movement, committed to advancing workers' empowerment
through economic, social, and political reform, and the overall democratisation
of the country.




[2] Demonstrations were organised in April and May 2015 to
commemorate the first anniversary of the sinking of the Sewol Ferry and to call
for an independent and transparent investigation into the Sewol Ferry incident.
KCTU also organised public rallies in November 2014 to express its opposition
to proposed labour law reforms. The charges filed against Mr. Han include
“special obstruction of public duty”, “special obstruction of public duty to
injure public officials”, “special destruction of public goods”, “general
obstruction of traffic”, “violation of article 16 of Act on Assembly and
Demonstration (matters observed by organizers)”, “failure of dispersion order”,
“hosting an assembly at banned place”, “incitement of violence” and “violation
of article 11 of the Act on Assembly and Demonstration (Places Prohibited for
Outdoor Assembly and Demonstration)”. 