Colombia:  Colombia: forced disappearance of  Robinson Ríos Uribe and José Gregorio Villada near Medellin
December  5, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Colombia / 2001 / DecemberColombia: Colombia: forced disappearance of  Robinson Ríos Uribe and José Gregorio Villada near MedellinCase COL 051201 The International Secretariat of the OMCT requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Colombia. Brief description of the situation: The International Secretariat of the OMCT has just been informed of the forced disappearance of Messrs. Robinson Ríos Uribe and José Gregorio Villada, on the route between Medellín (Antioquia) and Cali (Valle), in the rural zone of the Municipality of Caldas (Department of Antioquia). According to the information from the Foundation Committee of Solidarity with the Political Prisoners (FCSPP) and the “Semillas de Libertad” Human Rights Group (Colectivo de Derechos Humanos), on November 27, 2001, approximately at 11:30 at night, the “Expreso Palmira” bus that headed from Medellín to Cali, was stopped in a place known as “Primavera”, Municipality of Caldas, by a police patrol that, according to the reports, repeatedly carries out seizures here. The policemen proceeded to get all the passengers off, to search them and carry out  identification checks. According to the information, after the seizure, the policemen detained two persons who were found carrying a gun, and also Messrs. Robinson Ríos Uribe, 34, and José Gregorio Villada Betancur, 27.  Their whereabouts remain as yet unknown. The reports add that the bus driver did not submit a report when he arrived at Cali’s terminus because this is usual police procedure. The reports add that on November 29, 2001, the “Semillas de Libertad” Human Rights Group (Colectivo de Derechos Humanos), requested urgent search measures before the First Criminal Court with the aim of establishing the whereabouts of the two missing persons. However it appears that no progress has so far been made in the investigation.  It seems the urgent measures request was remitted to the 24th Criminal Court which, in its turn, transmitted it to the Director of Public Prosecutions’ office. The International Secretariat of the OMCT recalls that forced disappearance is considered a crime against humanity, and expresses its condemnation of these acts of violence.  OMCT equally condemns the persecution of the civil population, the apparent impunity enjoyed by the perpetrators and the failure of the municipal, governmental and national authorities to implement effective protective measures in order to prevent these acts.  Requested Action:  Please write to the Colombian Authorities urging them to:  i. take all measures necessary to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned persons and to locate those who are missing; ii. order a thorough and impartial investigation into the above-mentioned events, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to justice and apply the civil, penal or administrative sanctions stipulated by law; iii. fully execute the recommendations made by international and regional human rights organisations, including those of the High Commission for Human Rights, the United Nations Human Rights Commission, the Inter.American Human Rights Commission as well as national and governmental human rights organisations; iv. guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental liberties in all the country in accordance with national law and international human rights norms.  Addresses  · S.E. Álvaro Uribe Vélez, Presidente de la República, Cra. 8 n .7-26, Palacio de Nariño, Santafé de Bogotá. Fax: (+57 1) 566 20 71  · Consejería Presidencial de Derechos Humanos, Calle 7 n . 6-54 Piso 3, Santafé de Bogotá, D. C. Fax: (+57 1) 337 13 51  · General Fernando Tapias Stahelin, Comandante de las Fuerzas Militares, Avenida el Dorado con Cra. 52, Santafé de Bogotá. Fax: (+57 1) 222 29 35; e-mail: siden@mindefensa.gov.co ; pilaque@cgm.mil.co · Mission Permanente de la Colombie auprès de l’Office de las Nations Unies et des institutions spécialisées a Genève. Chemin du Champ d’Anier 17-19, 1209 Genève. Tel : (+41) 22 798 4554, 798 4555. E-mail: mission.colombia@ties.itu.int  Please also write to the embassies of Colombia in your respective country.  Geneva, December 5, 2001 