Azerbaijan:  Sport for Rights: Joint Letter to the Board of Directors of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)
July 20, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Azerbaijan / 2015 / JulyAzerbaijan: Sport for Rights: Joint Letter to the Board of Directors of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)Azerbaijan_2015.07.20_SFR_Letter_EBRD_English9 pages / 556 KB​​​Sport
 for Rights' campaign, of which OMCT is member, has been established to 
raise the problem of political prisoners in the context of the 
forthcoming international sporting events to be hosted by Azerbaijan. 


20 July 2015



Dear
President Chakrabarti,
We are
writing in advance of the EBRD's Board of Directors' meeting on the 22 July where
you will be deciding whether to arrange up to US$500,000,000 to Russia's Lukoil
for the Shah Deniz II offshore gas project in Azerbaijan.
We urge
you to reject the loan for failing to meeting the basic requirements of the
Agreement Establishing the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and
the Bank’s own Environmental and Social Policy. Under
the EBRD Agreement, the parties must be committed to human rights, multi-party democracy,
rule of law and pluralism. This is systematically being violated in Azerbaijan.
During
the last few years the Azerbaijani authorities have worked aggressively to silence
all forms of criticism and have effectively removed critical voices from public
life. Hundreds of human rights defenders, NGO leaders, youth and social media activists,
bloggers and journalists have been arrested and imprisoned.
Any loan
to Lukoil to develop Shah Deniz II will squeeze the space for civil society even
further as it bolsters the current regime[1], as well
as contradicting Article 1 of the EBRD's establishing agreement, which
states that you lend to “countries committed to and applying the principles of
multiparty democracy”. Diversifying Azerbaijan’s economy away from reliance
on hydrocarbons not only makes economic sense; it is also crucial for the
development of human rights and democracy in Azerbaijan.
The
Aliyev family has held onto power in Azerbaijan for two decades through a combination
of fraudulent elections, arresting opposition candidates, beating protesters
and curtailing media freedom. There are significant problems with Azerbaijan's
democratic structures. In 2009, 29 articles of the Azerbaijani constitution
were amended, the most important change being the abolition of the presidential
term limit. (Previously the constitution limited presidents to two five- year
terms). The constitutional change was widely condemned including by the Venice
Commission (the Council of Europe's advisory body on constitutional matters).
According
to the Venice Commission’s opinion, “Azerbaijan, the Constitution of which provides
for a Presidential system of Government, is undoubtedly a country where the
President concentrates extensive powers in his hands, given the few checks and balances
which exist. It was therefore logical that the original text of the
Constitution of Azerbaijan provided for a two-term limit… Explicit constitutional
limitations on the successive terms of a president are particularly important
in countries where democratic structures and their cultural presuppositions
have not yet been consolidated.”
The
recent crackdown began in 2013 in the run up to the Presidential Elections with
those opposing the government being beaten and jailed. The OSCE/ODIHR Election Observation
Mission concluded that the 2013 Presidential elections were “undermined by
limitations on the freedoms of expression, assembly and association that did
not guarantee a level playing field for candidates. Continued allegations of candidate
and voter intimidation and a restrictive media environment marred the campaign.
Significant problems were observed throughout all stages of election-day processes
and underscored the serious nature of the shortcomings that need to be addressed
in order for Azerbaijan to fully meet its OSCE commitments for genuine and
democratic elections.” In June 2015, the Azerbaijani authorities gave the OSCE one
month to halt all activities and withdraw their project coordinator from the country.
Last
year, Azerbaijani NGO the Institute for Reporter's Freedom and Safety (IRFS) submitted
comments to the EBRD's country strategy (attached for your information). In the
submission IRFS stated that “In the light of the Azerbaijani government’s well documented
failure to comply with its own commitments of democracy and pluralism we
believe expansion of the Bank’s portfolio in Azerbaijan is in direct
contradiction to the first Article of the Agreement Establishing the Bank.”
Since that time the democratic and human rights situation has deteriorated even
further, with IRFS becoming one of the many Azerbaijani NGOs, or local branches
of INGOs, forced into suspension or closure. IRFS’s director Emin Huseynov was
forced into hiding, and later exile, to avoid arrest.
Those
arrested over the last year include prominent activist Leyla Yunus whose work involved
monitoring political prisoners and promoting dialogue between Azerbaijani and
Armenian communities; the country's preeminent human rights lawyer Intigam Aliyev;
award-winning investigative journalist Khadija Ismayilova and Rasul Jafarov who
led the Sing for Democracy campaign which attracted international attention during
the 2012 Eurovision Song contest and began the Sports for Rights campaign in
the run up to the Baku 2015 European Olympic Games. These government critics now
face many years in jail on false charges.
On 24
June 2015, a group of 25 countries led by Ireland and supported by the USA, Canada,
the UK, Norway and the Netherlands, delivered a joint statement on Azerbaijan
to the UN Human Rights Council on country situations of concern, in which they
outlined the threats to freedom of expression in Azerbaijan and called on the
Azerbaijani authorities to “end its crackdown on civil society and respect fundamental
freedoms”.
In April
2015, Nils Muižnieks, the Commissioner for Human Rights at the Council of Europe
drew attention to the deliberate targeting of human rights defenders who work
with international institutions, stating that “the close working relationships
of the Commissioner’s Office, and the Council of Europe as a whole, with these
human rights defenders reinforce the belief that they are being deliberately targeted
with criminal proceedings as a result of their engagement in activities that
should be perfectly legal in a well-functioning democracy”[2], adding
that all of those arrested “are important and reliable partners of the Council
of Europe and the Commissioner’s Office.”
In the same report, the Commissioner also added “intimidation and reprisals against
human rights defenders in retaliation for their work at the international, regional
or national levels not only amount to attacks on human rights, but also breach
the rule of law.”
A
substantial improvement in the respect of basic rights and freedoms should be
achieved before you consider lending to Azerbaijan's oil and gas sector.
Corruption
reaches to the highest levels in Azerbaijan, including the President and his
family. Transparency International's 2014 Corruption Perceptions Index ranked Azerbaijan
126 out of 175 countries. The EBRD strategy for Azerbaijan[3] acknowledges
the challenges the country faces related to corruption and the steps that the
government has taken to fight against it. However, the strategy fails to address
the high-level corruption related to the business activities of President
Aliyev and his family. The arrest and detention of investigative journalist
Khadija Ismayilova, well-known for exposing the Aliyev family’s control of many
Azerbaijani businesses and the
movement of Azerbaijani state money to offshore accounts, raises serious questions
about the Azerbaijani authorities willingness to address corruption.
In April
2015 Azerbaijan was downgraded from 'compliant' to 'candidate' by the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI). The EITI stated that the downgrade
was a result of “deep concern for the ability of civil society to engage critically
in the EITI process in Azerbaijan”. If Azerbaijan fail to implement corrective action
by April 2016 it will be suspended from the EITI.
The
downgrading of Azerbaijan by the EITI is a key source of concern. The EBRDS energy
policy states that “The Bank is committed to adhere to best governance, transparency
and revenue management standards by requiring its clients to implement the
principles and requirements of the EITI.” The importance of adequate stakeholder
engagement in the EITI process is specifically noted in the EBRD's Energy
Policy. It states “One key component of transparency in the extractive industries
is stakeholder engagement...The Bank has an opportunity to play an important
role in conducting meaningful consultations with stakeholders.”
In 2012,
the government adopted a series of regressive amendments to the law on the
right to obtain information, the law on the state registration of legal
entities, and the law on commercial secrets.
On 6 July
2012, President Aliyev signed into law amendments limiting the disclosure of
information by corporate entities, which had been adopted by Parliament on 12 June
2012. Strongly criticized by pro-transparency groups, the changes curtail
public access to information about the ownership of commercial entities, the
amount of their charter capital, ownership structure, and other similar data. These
amendments, known as the “corporate secrecy amendments,” became effective in
October 2012.
This loan
undermines the EBRD's commitment to stakeholder engagement in the EITI. It
should not be considered until Azerbaijan has achieved compliant EITI status.
The EBRD
strategy for Azerbaijan also acknowledges the importance of supporting the
diversification of the Azerbaijani economy. This diversification has not
happened. The 2014 IMF country report on Azerbaijan sets out a devastating
analysis of resource dependency. It shows that despite oil profits to the
government increasing by about 30 per cent of GDP in mid-2000s, the money has
been spent, with almost no accountability or oversight. In the last two years
oil production has declined, after reaching its peak in 2010, and reserves
could be depleted in the next 15 to 20 years. The low oil price is now having a
serious impact on the Azerbaijani economy, as indicated by the devaluing of
Azerbaijan's local currency, the Manat. This loan will further
Azerbaijani dependency on hydrocarbons.
In the
run up to the European Games, held last month in the Azerbaijani capital Baku, Dunja
Mijatović, OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media stated: “Journalists and
free expression advocates sit in Azerbaijani jails in record numbers. Their lot
is growing. Azerbaijan scores near the bottom of every objective ranking of
nations based on free media and free expression criteria.”
In light
of the above information, it is imperative that the EBRD do not arrange this
loan on the 22 July. We urge you to use your position to recommend that the
loan is declined.
Yours
sincerely,
1.
Article 19
2. Both
ENDS
3.
Business & Human Rights Resource Centre
4. CEE
Bankwatch Network
5.
Committee to Protect Journalists
6.
Counter Balance
7.
Friends of the Earth, US
8. ODG
9. PEN
10.
People in Need
11.
Platform
12.
Polish Green Network
13.
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH).
14.
Re:common
15.
Urgewald,
16. World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT).




APPENDIX A: Summary information compiled by
local experts
This
document has been compiled by local independent experts in Azerbaijan who wish
to remain anonymous fearing imminent reprisals by the increasingly repressive
regime. Should the EBRD leadership be interested in hearing further details
these experts are available for a series of meetings at the EBRD headquarters.
The
income from the energy revenue has for years been spent on fuelling a
repressive machine. Funds coming from energy resources have been used to secure
loyalty from law enforcement agencies so they can be used for the mass
oppression of critical voices.
Unlimited presidential term
In the
summer of 2008, the Azerbaijan parliament had rejected the Venice Commission
and OSCE's Joint Opinion, dated June 2008, stressing the need for parity in the
election commissions. Azerbaijan's election commissions remained under control
of the ruling Yeni Azerbaycan Partiyası (YAP), taking decisions with two-thirds
majority. As long as this is the case, the opposition argued, "fraud
during the counting and tabulation of votes" cannot be prevented. 
Furthermore,
in 2009, the authorities took an unprecedented step of further centralizing the
power in the hands of the ruling establishment. In December 2008, the ruling party
announced draft constitutional changes. In March 2009, the referendum took
place and 29 articles of the constitution were amended, the most important
change being the abolition of the presidential term limit. (The constitution
limited presidents to two five-year terms). The constitution change was widely
condemned including by the Venice Commission.
In March
2009 the Council of Europe's Venice Commission, the advisory body on
constitutional matters, criticized the constitutional amendments, stating that
they distort the balance of power and contradict European practice[4]. The main concerns raised by the reforms relate to the abolition of the two-term
limit to the office of President and to the President’s position. Under the
previous provisions, the President could only be elected for two consecutive
terms, and the amendment abolished the limit to the number of terms. 
According
to the Venice Commission’s opinion,[5]
“Azerbaijan, the Constitution of which provides for a Presidential system of
Government, is undoubtedly a country where the President concentrates extensive
powers in his hands, given the few checks and balances which exist. It was
therefore logical that the original text of the Constitution of Azerbaijan
provided for a two-term limit. … As a rule, it can be said that the abolition
of existing limits preventing the unlimited re-election of a President is a
step back, in terms of democratic achievements. … Explicit constitutional
limitations on the successive terms of a president are particularly important
in countries where democratic structures and their cultural presuppositions
have not yet been consolidated.”[6]
Under the
European Convention on Human Rights, all citizens of Council of Europe member
states have a right to democratic governance. The removal of a presidential
term limit in Azerbaijan (Article 101, V)[7]
violates the European Convention of Human Rights[8]
and constitutes a breach of international law.[9]

The case of Ilgar Mammadov, critic of the
Southern Gas Corridor (TAP/ TANAP)
The recent
crackdown began in 2013 in the run up to the Presidential Elections with those
opposing the government being beaten and jailed. The government of Azerbaijan
refuses to comply with international demands and immediately set free prominent
opposition leader, Ilgar Mammadov, after the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe made a second call demanding his release. lgar Mammadov has
been one of the most outspoken critics of the Southern Gas Corridor (TAP/TANAP)
project. He was a member of advisory board of the Revenue Watch Institute
(RWI). He was arrested in February 2013 and then sentenced to seven years in
jail on trumped up, politically-motivated charges in March 2014.
Civil society crackdown 
As stated
on the EBRD website, “civil society organisations are both influential
audiences and partners of EBRD in its countries of operations. They provide a
valuable contribution to the development of the Bank’s policies, strategies and
the implementation of projects, particularly on complex, large scale operations”.
After
Aliyev secured a third term in the office through a deeply flawed election, he
has started an unprecedented “witch hunt” against those who challenged the
legitimacy of the election. Human rights activists, journalists, and other
regime critics were subjected to criminal charges and physical and financial
harassment. Numerous nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) had their bank
accounts frozen and many were forced to close, completely shutting up the space
for political discourse.
Over the last
few years, the climate for civil society in Azerbaijan has deteriorated to the
point where it seriously threatens the ability of civil society organizations
(CSOs) to engage effectively in the watch dog activities such as tackling
corruption and promoting safe and sustainable environment. 
The USAID
Civil Society Organization Sustainability Index (CSOSI) which since 1997 has
been used to assess international and regional trends in the civil society
sector and to identify common obstacles impeding the sector's sustainability,
such as the legal environment, organizational capacity, and financial
viability, points out to serious deterioration of sustainability of civil
society in Azerbaijan:
The legal
environment in Azerbaijan has deteriorated markedly, dropping from the bottom
of the Sustainability Evolving category to the middle of the Sustainability
Impeded category. Since the end of 2013, several amendments were made to the
laws governing CSOs that significantly limit the operational environment for civil
society. In addition, in 2014 the government launched an unprecedented wave of
investigations into the offices of domestic and foreign CSOs, followed by
interference in their activities, freezing of their bank accounts, and
unjustified refusals to register grant contracts. As a result of these changes,
Azerbaijan now has the lowest score it has recorded in this dimension since
2000.
Problems
have been documented for some time, but have become particularly acute since
February 2014, when new amendments to a number of pieces of legislation which
regulate civil society activities in Azerbaijan came into force and when the
government instituted what can only be described as a crackdown on independent
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), especially those that dared to be
critical of the authorities. This has been wide ranging, but it has
particularly targeted groups which promote government transparency and
accountability. This includes members of the NGO Coalition for “Increasing
Transparency in Extractive Industries” (EITI NGO Coalition), many of which are
the same groups which have been engaged in promoting the transparency and
economic freedom in the country. 
Serious problems: from devaluation to
violations of property rights
The
devaluation the national currency (AZN) alongside the oil price fall has
lcreated social problems in the country. Because of difficulties with liquidity
many large banks have started to claim their loans back from entrepreneurs. For
example, in order to solve the problem of the loans issued by the International
Bank of Azerbaijan –in which the state is the main shareholder-- authorities ordered mass arrests of more than
200 businessmen. During the arrests, the officers from the law enforcement
agencies put pressure on the businessmen either to return the loan far before
the initial scheduled deadline or to
give all their assets to the bank. In fact, for the first time within last the
10 years, the regime has engaged in open misappropriation of private assets. The similar misappropriation
took place in 2005 when the regime took control of largest private energy
company Azpetrol.
Furthermore,
because of serious financial situation in the country Azerbaijani authorities
announced privatization plans for the International Bank of Azerbaijan. Local
and international experts fear the country’s largest bank will be privatized on
the basis of the corruption scheme, similar to the one used to privatize
another large bank (which is now owned by Aliyev family) several years back.
Against the background of systematic problems in economy and an anticipated
inevitable drop of credit ratings,the ruling elite continues to benefit from
oil resources at the expense of the Azerbaijani people.
Lukoil in Azerbaijan
According
to research data by local experts, Lukoil has, for years, been engaged in mass
violation of labor rights. The company has built strong ties with the ruling
elite. The company has not done any significant activity to protect
environment. Lukoil served as a mediator in negotiations between the Kremlin
administration and Aliyev. Following Russia’ s aggression in Ukraine Lukoil has
been subjected to international sanctions. For years, Lukoil worked with
Yanukovich regime so it could be deemed responsible for current situation in
Ukraine. 
Because
of the lack of transparent policy, it is not known who are real shareholders of
Lukoil in Azerbaijan and how income is distributed. Local experts have serious
concerns that top government officials have their shared in Lukoil Azerbaijan.
Transparency and anti-corruption activities
The
recent anti-corruption measures employed by the regime are nothing but
imitation of the fight against corruption. While authorities seem to tackle
small scale, bureaucratic or petty corruption by establishing ASAN Services
Center Azerbaijan legislative framework creates the basis for offshore zone.
In 2012,
the government adopted a series of regressive amendments to the law on the
right to obtain information, the law on the state registration of legal
entities, and the law on commercial secrets. 
On 6 July
2012, President Aliyev signed into law amendments limiting the disclosure of
information by corporate entities, which had been adopted by Parliament on 12
June 2012. Strongly criticized by pro-transparency groups, the changes curtail
public access to information about the ownership of commercial entities, the
amount of their charter capital, ownership structure, and other similar data. These
amendments, known as the “corporate secrecy amendments,” became effective in
October 2012.
The
amendments to the 2005 law on commercial information prohibit government
officials from distributing information about companies if doing so “contradicts
the national interests of Azerbaijan in political, economic, and monetary policy,
the defense of public order, the health and moral values of the people, or
harms the commercial or other interests of individuals.” The reforms also make
the release of information contingent upon receiving permission from all
individuals named in the records.
The laws
on the right to obtain information and the state registration of legal entities
were also amended. The amendments extend the scope of “legitimate public
interests” protected in Article 3 of the Constitutional Law of the Republic of
Azerbaijan on Regulation of the Exercise of Human Rights and Freedoms, and use
language that lacks precision and clarity. 
The
amendments to the law on the state registration of legal entities makes secret
the registration information for commercial legal entities, including
information about their founders and shareholders. Such information can now
only be disclosed on the basis of an inquiry to the courts and investigative
bodies, to the subjects of operational search activities in cases specified by
law, and to financial monitoring bodies in the cases and manner specified by
the law “on the struggle against legalization of funds or other property
obtained through criminal means and financing of terrorism.” According to the
bill, this information can only be disclosed to relevant bodies, lawyers, and
third parties following the consent of the information-owner.
The amendments
contradict Article 10.2 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human
Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, which stipulates: “The exercise of these
freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject
to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by
law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national
security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of
disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection
of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing the disclosure of
information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority and
impartiality of the judiciary.” The amendments also contradict provisions of
the UN Convention against Corruption and the UN’s Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy.[10]

The
amendments can be viewed as an action by the Azerbaijani government to reject
the obligations it had previously undertaken before the Azerbaijani people and
the international community to fight corruption. They increase restrictions on
freedom of information and breach the principles of transparency and public
control over the activity of legal entities. 
The
Council of Europe’s Group of States Against Corruption (GRECO) group criticized
these amendments.

APPENDIX B: LIST OF JAILED JOURNALISTS AND
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Jailed
journalists:
1. Nijat
Aliyev – editor-in-chief of the website azadxeber.az, serving a 10-year prison
sentence on spurious charges of drug possession and the illegal import and sale
of religious literature.
2. Araz
Guliyev – editor of the website xeber44.com, serving an eight-year prison
sentence on spurious charges of illegal possession of weapons, inciting hatred,
and offensive action against the flag or emblem of Azerbaijan.
3. Parviz
Hashimli – Bizim Yol newspaper reporter and editor of the moderator.az
website, serving an eight-year prison sentence on spurious charges of
organising the sale of weapons from Iran.
4. Seymur
Hezi –Azadliq newspaper reporter and presenter of the Azerbaijan Hour
satellite television programme, serving a five-year prison sentence on spurious
hooliganism charges.
5. Khadija
Ismayilova – Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty journalist detained on
spurious charges of embezzlement, illegal entrepreneurship, tax evasion, abuse
of power, and inciting someone to attempt suicide.
6. Hilal
Mammadov – editor-in-chief of Tolishi Sedo newspaper, serving a five-year
prison sentence on spurious charges of drug possession, treason, and inciting
hatred.
7. Rauf
Mirkadirov – Zerkalo newspaper columnist, detained on spurious treason
charges, awaiting trial.
8. Tofig
Yagublu – Yenu Musavat newspaper columnist, serving a five-year prison
sentence on spurious charges of organising mass riots and using violence
against police officers.
Jailed
human rights defenders:
1. Intigam
Aliyev – human rights lawyer and Chairman of the Legal Education Society,
serving a 7.5-year prison sentence on spurious charges of tax evasion, illegal
entrepreneurship, and abuse of power.
2. Rasul
Jafarov – Chairman of the Human Rights Club, serving a 6.5-year prison
sentence on spurious charges of tax evasion, illegal entrepreneurship, and
abuse of power.
3. Anar
Mammadli – Chairman of the Election Monitoring and Democracy Studies
Centre, serving a 5.5-year prison sentence on spurious charges of tax evasion,
illegal entrepreneurship, and abuse of power.
4. Arif
Yunus – historian and academic, detained on spurious charges of treason and
fraud, currently on trial
5. Leyla
Yunus – Director of the Institute for Peace and Democracy, detained on
spurious charges of treason, fraud, forgery, tax evasion, and illegal entrepreneurship,
currently on trial.



[1]
There is a large body of academic literature demonstrating the link between oil
wealth and authoritarianism, in particular, in The Oil Curse: How Petroleum Wealth Shapes the Development of Nations,
Michael Ross notes that “oil has kept autocrats in power by enabling them to
increase spending, reduce taxes, buy the loyalty of the armed forces, and conceal
their own corruption and incompetence,” (p.63) because oil revenues are “unusually
large, do not come from taxes, fluctuate unpredictably, and can be easily hidden”
(p. 6). The exploitation of Azerbaijan's oil and gas wealth has hindered the development
of democracy in Azerbaijan. As Rasul Jafarov explained just one month before his
arrest: “Before the oil and gas incomes came to Azerbaijan we had more
democracy and freedom.” Hydrocarbon revenues have provided the Aliyevs with the
finance needed to pay security forces and establish a secure income and
therefore enabled them to ignore citizens’ voices because they are not reliant
on those citizens for a tax base.


[2]                Third Party Intervention by the
Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights, Strasbourg, 16 April 2015, accessible
here:
https://wcd.coe.int/com.instranet.InstraServlet?command=com.instranet.CmdBlobGet&InstranetImage=2728498&SecMode=1&DocId=2259082&Usage=2


[3]
              http://www.ebrd.com/downloads/country/strategy/azerbaijan-country-strategy.pdf


[4]                      
http://bit.ly/1fTqx7b


[5]                      
Ibid


[6]                      
http://bit.ly/14HuXZU


[7]                      
See the Constitution of Republic of Azerbaijan, available at http://bit.ly/Uy7NQd


[8]               
http://bit.ly/ZsNzNM


[9]               
http://bit.ly/1dXqDhs


[10]               UN’s Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, http://bit.ly/1euCYLo 