Cambodia:  Virulent campaign and threats against Mr. Ou Virak and CCHR staff
January  8, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2014 / JanuaryCambodia: Virulent campaign and threats against Mr. Ou Virak and CCHR staff
KHM 001 / 0114 / OBS 001
Death threats / Harassment
Cambodia
January 8, 2014
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human
Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Cambodia.
 
Brief description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed about the virulent smear campaign and death
threats against Mr. Ou Virak, President of the Cambodian Center for
Human Rights (CCHR), a non-aligned, independent, non-governmental organization
that works to promote and protect democracy and respect for human rights
throughout Cambodia, as well as CCHR staff. Mr. Ou Virak and CCHR staff were
targeted after CCHR criticised a speech delivered by Cambodian National Rescue
Party (CNRP) leader Sam Rainsy, which contained derogatory remarks towards the
Vietnamese community in Cambodia and against women.
 
According to the information received, on December 12, 2013, the CCHR issued an
open letter addressing discriminatory language used by Mr. Sam Rainsy, leader
of the opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP), in a speech he
delivered in Siem Reap on December 10, 2013[1]. The
letter states that during the rally, Mr. Sam Rainsy discussed Vietnamese
immigration to Cambodia, referring to the Vietnamese as “yuon”, a term often
considered pejorative. In the same speech, Prime Minister Hun Sen was also
reportedly described as being “weaker than a woman”.
 
Since the publication of this letter, CCHR, and in particular its President Mr.
Ou Virak, has received widespread criticism, hate messages and threats,
including death threats, via email and social media, claiming that the term
“yuon” is not pejorative. Mr. Ou Virak has also received comments on his
Facebook page ranging from disappointment to outright vulgar abuse. Mr. Ou
Virak has been called a traitor, a spy, and received numerous racial slurs.
Messages also questioned his patriotism, and demanded he immediately resign
from CCHR, stop practicing human rights work, and leave Cambodia for good. 
 
On December 18, 2013, CCHR issued a press release to provide clarification on
its open letter. CCHR precised that the context in which the word “yuon” was
used on December 10, 2013 was in itself discriminatory towards Vietnamese
people. During the December 10 speech, Mr. Sam Rainsy indeed accused the
Vietnamese of “taking Khmer jobs and land”. In its press release, CCHR called
upon political leaders to recognise the universality of human rights and to
discuss issues such as immigration without resorting to discrimination or
racism[2].
Following the publication of this clarification, Mr. Ou Virak was further
targeted.
 
It was not until December 23, 2013 that Mr. Sam Rainsy finally responded to the
controversy by writing an opinion piece in the Cambodia Daily. However,
Mr. Rainsy failed to condemn the death threats against Mr. Ou Virak. On the
same day, comments were again posted on Mr. Ou Virak’s Facebook page slandering
him and threatening his relatives with violence.
 
Moreover, human rights monitors at CNRP protests that have taken place in the
past weeks to demand the resignation of Prime Minister Hun Sen following the
disputed July 2013 general election and in support to the strikes organised by
garment workers in Cambodia reported being asked by CNRP supporters whether
they belonged to CCHR and threatened them of violence if they were. The
security of CCHR’s staff, when carrying out their human rights work, is thus
also a matter for concern. 
 
The Observatory expresses its deep concern about the threats against Mr. Ou
Virak and CCHR staff, as they seem directly related to his human rights
activities advocating against racial discrimination in Cambodia. The
Observatory calls upon the Cambodian authorities to order a thorough, impartial
and transparent investigation into the above mentioned facts in order to
identify all those responsible for the threats and messages against Mr. Ou
Virak and CCHR staff, bring them before a competent and impartial tribunal and
apply to them the sanctions provided by the law. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the Cambodian authorities and leaders of the CNRP urging them
to:
 
i. Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of
Mr. Ou Virak, as well as of all CCHR’s staff and human rights defenders in
Cambodia;
 
ii. Order an immediate, thorough, transparent investigation into the
above-mentioned facts in order to identify all those responsible for the
threats and messages against Mr. Ou Virak and CCHR staff, bring them before an
independent tribunal, and apply them the sanctions provided by the law;
 
iii. Put an end to acts of harassment against Mr. Ou Virak, CCHR staff and all
human rights defenders in Cambodia and ensure in all circumstances that they
are able to carry out their work without unjustified hindrance and fear of
reprisal;
 
iv. Comply with all the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly,
in particular:
- Article 1, which
states that “everyone has the right, individually or in association with
others, to promote the protection and realization of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, 
- and Article 12.2
which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence
of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present
Declaration.”
 
v. Guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other international human
rights instruments ratified by Cambodia.
 
Addresses: 
 
·       
Mr. Sam Rainsy,
President of the Cambodian National Rescue Party, House #576, National Road
N°2, Sangkat Chakangres Leu, Khan Mean Chey Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia,
Email: cnrpcabinet@gmail.com 
·       
Mr. Hun Sen, Prime
Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, 41 Russian Federation Blvd, Phnom Penh,
Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 360666 / 855 23 880624 (c/o Council of
Ministers), Email: leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh / cppparty@gmail.com 
·       
Mr. H.E. Ang Vong
Vathna, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, 240 Sothearos Blvd, Phnom
Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 364119. Email: moj@cambodia.gov.kh
·       
Mr. Sar Kheng, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of Interior, Ministry of Interior, 275 Norodom
Blvd, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: + 855 23 212708. Email:
moi@interior.gov.kh
·       
Mr. Hor Nam Hong,
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs, 161 Preah Sisowath Quay,
Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: + 855 23 216144 / + 855 23 216939. Email:
mfaic@mfa.gov.kh / mfaicasean@online.com.kh
·       
Council of Ministers,
41 Russian Federation Blvd., Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: +855 23
880624 Email: ocm@cambodia.gov.kh
·       
Mr. Ke Sovann, Deputy
Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Cambodia to the
United Nations in Geneva, Chemin de Taverney 3, Case postale 213, 1218
Grand-Saconnex, Switzerland, Fax: + 41 22 788 77 74. Email: camemb.gva@mfa.gov.kh
/ cambodge@bluewin.ch 
 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of Cambodia in your respective
countries.
 
*** 
Geneva-Paris, January 8, 2014
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in
your reply.
 
The Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the protection of
Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of
need. 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·       
E-mail:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·       
Tel and fax OMCT + 41
(0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
·       
Tel and fax FIDH + 33
(0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
 



[1] http://cchrcambodia.org/media/files/press_release/455_211coltcruodl%28_en.pdf


[2] http://www.cchrcambodia.org/index.php?url=media/media.php&p=press_detail.php&prid=456&id=5 