Presentation of the New edition of the Handbooks on torture remedies in Washington, D.C. in the framework of the 154th period of sessions of the IACHR
March 12, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Events / 2015 / MarchPresentation of the New edition of the Handbooks on torture remedies in Washington, D.C. in the framework of the 154th period of sessions of the IACHR Flyer invitation_IAS presentation Handbook1 page / 834 KB

The Prohibition of
Torture and Ill-Treatment in the Inter-American Human Rights System: A Handbook
for Victims and their AdvocatesThe World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights are pleased to invite you to the presentation of the new publication. The purpose of this Handbook is to provide practical advice to persons wishing to bring individual complaints concerning violations of the prohibition of torture and other forms of ill-treatment before the Inter-American Human Rights System. As such, the Handbook provides an accessible and comprehensive guide to the practice and procedure of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, as well as a detailed analysis of the substantive law developed by the Commission and Court concerning torture and ill-treatment.Thursday
19 March 2015 from 12:30 to 2:00 p.m.At Robert
F. Kennedy Human Rights
1300 19th St. NW
Suite 750, Washington D.C., 20036
Please
RSVP by 18 March at rsvp@rfkcenter.org
In the presence of: 
- Commissioner James L. Cavallaro
Rapporteur on the Rights of
Persons Deprived of Liberty
Inter-American Commission on
Human Rights
- Santiago
A. Canton 
Executive Director of RFK
Partners for Human Rights
Member of the OMCT Executive
Council
- Helena Solà
Martín
Human Right Adviser and
Americas Desk, OMCT
- Alejandro
Malambo
Lawyer, Colombian
Commission of Jurists (CCJ) 
- Claudia
Martín / Diego Rodríguez-Pinzón
American University (WCL)You can download the flyer here.
We very much hope that you will be able to attend and participate in the discussion with the panel!
Best wishes,
OMCT International Secretariat 