Sudan:  Incommunicado detention of 8 human rights defenders, lawyer and journalists, and arbitrary detention of a journalist and human rights defender for participating in peaceful protests.
February  8, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2018 / FebruarySudan: Incommunicado detention of 8 human rights defenders, lawyer and journalists, and arbitrary detention of a journalist and human rights defender for participating in peaceful protests. URGENT APPEAL - THE
OBSERVATORY
SDN 002 / 0218 / OBS 017
Incommunicado detention /
Ill-treatment /
Arbitrary detention
Sudan
February 8, 2018
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH
and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Sudan.

 
Description of the
situation:
The Observatory has been
informed by the African Center for Justice and Peace Studies
(ACJPS) about the incommunicado detention of Ms. Nahid
Jabrallah, Director of the Sima Centre for Training and Protection of Women
and Children’s Rights based in Khartoum, Mr. Mohamed Abdallah Aldouma, Chairperson of the Darfur Bar
Association, Mr. Salih
Mahmoud Osman, Vice-Chairperson of
the Darfur Bar Association, Ms. Hanan Hassan Khalifa, human rights lawyer, Ms. Rawa
Jaafar Bakhit, advocate for the rights of displaced families, Mr. Amjed Fareed, blogger and human rights
defender, Mr. Ahmed Jadeen,
journalist with Aljareeda newspaper,
and Mr. Mohammed Abdulmonim,
freelance journalist, as well as of the arbitrary detention of Ms. Amel
Habani, award-winning
journalist and Coordinator in the No Oppression Against Women Initiative in
Sudan. They are reportedly all detained in relation to their participation to nation-wide
peaceful protests against rising commodity prices, which has resulted in the
arrest of several human rights defenders and civil society leaders. Yet no
charges against them have been levelled to date. 

According to the
information received, on January 16, 2018, Ms. Nahid Jabrallah and Ms. Amel
Habani were arrested in Khartoum as they were taking part in such peaceful protests.
Both remain detained by the National Intelligence Security Service (NISS) at
the Omdurman Women’s Prison, in Khartoum. Moreover, Ms. Nahid Jabrallah has
been detained incommunicado since her arrest. It has further been reported that
her health conditions are particularly delicate as she was involved in a car
accident prior to her arrest. 

Acts of ill-treatment against
Ms. Amel Habani have been reported as she was allegedly beaten with an electric
rod during interrogation. On January 29, 2018, she was allowed a visit from her
mother and her two children in the presence of NISS agents but was denied a
visit from her husband and does not have access to her lawyer. A constitutional
appeal contesting the lawfulness of her detention was filed on February 5, 2018
on her behalf against the Government of Sudan and the NISS. 




On January 17, 2018, Ms.
Rawa Jaafar Bakhit and Mr. Mohamed Abdallah Aldouma were arrested as they were
taking part in other protests in Omdurman. They remain detained incommunicado respectively
at the Omdurman Women’s Prison, in Khartoum, and at Shalla prison, in North
Darfur, where Mr. Mohamed Abdallah Aldouma was transferred on January 26.


On January 18, 2018, Mr.
Amjed Fareed was arrested from his home in Khartoum and has since been detained
incommunicado within the NISS premises in Khartoum. 

On January 31, 2018, Ms.
Hanan Hassan Khalifa was detained in Khartoum Bahri at a police/NISS checkpoint
in the main street targeting the people heading to join a protest. She is still
detained incommunicado the Omdurman Women’s Prison, in Khartoum. 

On the same day, Mr. Ahmed
Jadeen and Mr. Mohammed Abdulmonim were arrested in Khartoum Bahri while they
were covering protests. Both journalists had been monitoring and documenting
cases of detainees in connection with the protests. They are being detained at
the NISS political section in Khartoum Bahari.
On February 1, 2018, Mr.
Salih Mahmoud Osman was arrested from his office in Khartoum and has been
detained incommunicado within the NISS premises in Khartoum since. The Observatory fears that these arrests and detentions occur in
reaction to nation-wide demonstrations that began on January 6, 2018 and were
set off by the announcement of Sudan’s 2018 budget and the lifting of subsidies
and measures, effectively tripling Sudan’s U.S. dollar exchange rate and
increasing the price of basic commodities. Sudanese authorities have carried
out a campaign of massive arrests and detentions, including political party
leaders, journalists, students, human rights defenders and other individuals
for their involvement in the protests. The police and the NISS have used
excessive force to disperse and arrest protesters, including the reported use of
tear gas and beatings with sticks and water hose pipes[1].

 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the incommunicado detention of Ms. Nahid Jabrallah, Mr. Mohamed Abdallah
Aldouma, Mr. Salih Mahmoud Osman, Ms. Hanan
Hassan Khalifa, Ms. Rawa Jaafar
Bakhit, Mr. Amjed Fareed, Mr. Ahmed Jadeen, and Mr. Mohammed Abdulmonim,
which significantly enhances vulnerability to ill-treatment, as well as the
arbitrary detention of Ms. Amel Habani, as they clearly aim at punishing their
peaceful and legitimate human rights activities. 
 
The
Observatory urges Sudanese authorities to immediately and unconditionally
release them, and in the meantime to guarantee their physical and psychological
integrity and their right to a fair trial, including unhindered access to their
lawyers and families.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities of Sudan asking them to:
 
 
       i.        
Guarantee the physical
and psychological integrity of Ms. Nahid
Jabrallah, Mr. Mohamed Abdallah Aldouma, Mr. Salih Mahmoud Osman, Ms.
Hanan Hassan Khalifa, Ms. Rawa Jaafar Bakhit, Mr. Amjed Fareed,
Mr. Ahmed Jadeen, and Mr. Mohammed Abdulmonim and Ms. Amel Habani, as well as
of all human rights defenders in Sudan;
 
      ii.        
Immediately and
unconditionally release Ms. Nahid
Jabrallah, Mr. Mohamed Abdallah Aldouma, Mr. Salih Mahmoud Osman, Ms.
Hanan Hassan Khalifa, Ms. Rawa Jaafar Bakhit, Mr. Amjed Fareed,
Mr. Ahmed Jadeen, and Mr. Mohammed Abdulmonim and Ms. Amel Habani, and all
detained human rights defenders in Sudan as their
arbitrary detention is merely aimed at punishing them for their legitimate
human rights activities;
 
     iii.        
In the meantime,
guarantee the right to due process and fair trial of Ms. Nahid Jabrallah, Mr. Mohamed Abdallah
Aldouma, Mr. Salih Mahmoud Osman, Ms. Hanan
Hassan Khalifa, Ms. Rawa Jaafar
Bakhit, Mr. Amjed Fareed, Mr. Ahmed Jadeen, and Mr. Mohammed Abdulmonim
and Ms. Amel Habani, including the unhindered access to their lawyers and
family;
 
    iv.        
Carry out an immediate,
independent and impartial investigation into alleged above-mentioned acts of
ill-treatment against Ms. Amel Habani in order to bring all those responsible
before a competent tribunal in accordance with international standards;
 
       i.        
Put an end to all forms
of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Ms. Nahid Jabrallah,
Ms. Amel Habani, Ms. Hanan Hassan Khalifa and Ms. Rawa Jaafar Bakhit and all
human rights defenders in Sudan so that they are able to carry out their work
without hindrance or fear of reprisals;
 
      ii.        
Conform with the
provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the
General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially Articles
1, 6(c) and 12.2; and
 
     iii.        
More generally, ensure
in all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with
international and regional human rights instruments ratified by Sudan.

Addresses:


·       H.E Mr. Omar Hassan Ahmad Al-Bashir, President of Sudan, Fax:
+249183783223; Email: info@presidency.gov.sd
·       Dr
Idris Ibrahim Jameel, Minister of Justice, Fax: +24983791544 / +249183764168 / + 249183770883; Email: moj@moj.gov.sd
·      
Mr. Ibrahim Ahmed Ghandour,
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax:+249183772941
·       Gen. Dr. Hamid Manan Mohamed, Minister of Interior, Fax: +249183779383 /
249183776554; Email: ministry@mfa.gov.sd
·       Advisory Council for Human rights, Rapporteur, Fax: + 249183770883 
·       H.E. Mr. Mustafa Osman Ismail Elamin, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of
the Republic of Sudan United Nations in Geneva, Fax: +41227312656 /
+41227161970; Email: mission.sudan@bluewinch.ch,
·       Embassy of Sudan in Brussels, Fax: +3226483499; Email: sudanbx@yahoo.com

 
Please
also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Sudan in your respective
country.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, February 8, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the FIDH.
The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations
of repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members
of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·      
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
·       Tel and fax FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25
18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80



[1]
For more information, see for instance ACJPS
Statement, February 7, 2018 and OMCT Press Release, Sudan:
Escalating government crackdown on protesters sparks greater safety concerns,
January 30, 2018. 