Cambodia:  Press Release - Cambodia: The UN Committee Against Torture issues Provisional Conclusions and Recommendations on Cambodia
May 13, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2003 / MayCambodia: Press Release - Cambodia: The UN Committee Against Torture issues Provisional Conclusions and Recommendations on CambodiaPRESS RELEASE Geneva, 13 May 2003  The UN Committee Against Torture issues Provisional Conclusions and Recommendations on Cambodia in the Absence of a State Representative   The Asian Legal Resource Center and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) welcome the Provisional Conclusions and Recommendations of the UN Committee Against Torture on Cambodia’s initial report. The Committee was forced to issue provisional conclusions as Cambodia had not sent a representative to the sessions who could respond to the Committee’s questions. An observer was present who received the Committee’s questions but was not in a position to issue a response. The Committee requested that a response be provided by August 31 2003 to the questions put to the government’s observer and to the issues raised by the provisional conclusions and recommendations.  In its conclusions, the Committee expressed concern, amongst other things, regarding: the numerous ongoing allegations of torture and other ill-treatment; the extended impunity for past and present violations of human rights; and the widespread allegations of corruption amongst public officials in the criminal justice system. The Committee then issued its recommendations, which included:   -	that effective measures be taken to establish and ensure a fully independent and professional Judiciary;  -	that necessary measures be taken to guarantee access to justice for all the people in Cambodia, in particular the poor and inhabitants of rural and distant areas of the country; and  -	that urgent measures be taken to improve conditions of detention in police stations and prisons.   The Asian Legal Resource Center and the World Organisation Against Torture regret the absence of a government representative that would have been in a position to enter into constructive dialogue with the members of the Committee against Torture during the Committee’s sessions. The two organisations would like to urge the government to respond to the Committee’s questions and to consider, in good faith, the implementation of the recommendations made.  The Asian Legal Resource Center and the World Organisation Against Torture would also like to suggest that the Committee consider adopting practical steps, including carrying out on-site visits, so as to develop co-operation with governments and in particular in this case with Cambodia, for the implementation of its recommendations. In addition, the two organisations feel that it would be of significant use for the UN Field office in Cambodia to offer technical assistance to the government following the Committee’s recommendations, particularly in the drafting of new legislation.  The Asian Legal Resource Center and the OMCT presented a joint alternative report in preparation for the session of the Committee Against Torture.  For copies of the alternative reports or for further information please contact OMCT at + 41 22 809 4939 or omct@omct.org. 