Cambodia:  The NGO Ponlok Khmer threatened with closure
April 11, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2014 / AprilCambodia: The NGO Ponlok Khmer threatened with closure

KHM 002 / 0414 / OBS 026
Obstacles to freedom of association
/
Harassment
Cambodia
April 11, 2014
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Cambodia.
 
Brief description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by the Cambodian
Center for Human Rights (CCHR) that the non-governmental
organisation Ponlok Khmer has been threatened with closure. Ponlok Khmer is a
small NGO based in Preah Vihear province that supports ethnic minorities in
their efforts to protect their land rights[1].
 
According to the information received, on April 1, 2014, Preah
Vihear Provincial Governor Oum Mara sent a letter to the Ministry of Interior,
demanding the closure of the local office of the NGO Ponlok Khmer. The letter
accused the NGO of inciting villagers to commit illegal activities.
 
Ponlok Khmer has been working with
the Kuoy villagers of Prame commune, Tbaeng Mean Chey district, Preah Vihear province,
who have been involved in a land dispute with the Chinese company Roy Feng
International Co. Ltd. On April 1, 2014, the villagers decided to
destroy the company’s sugarcane plantation as a sign of protest against the
alleged encroachment on their community farmland. Mr. Lut Sang, a staff
member of Ponlok Khmer, was present to monitor the protest.
 
Following
the protest, the Provincial Governor wrote a letter to the Minister of
Interior, detailing his intentions to close the Ponlok Khmer offices, to create
a working group to meet with villagers and ask them to stop destroying
sugarcane, and to allow the Roy Feng Company to file a lawsuit against the
community leaders. 
 
In addition,
Mr. Lut Sang and two community leaders, Ms. Noun Mon and Ms. Roeung
Khann, were summoned by the Preah Vihear provincial police chief to appear
on April 2, 2014 at the local police station. On April 4, 2014, the police
issued a new summons that also included Ms. Seung Sang, another community leader. On that
day, the police adjourned the hearing without any further notice.
 
On April 5, 2014, Ponlok Khmer wrote a letter to Preah Vihear provincial
authority asking a copy of the official letter that Preah Vihear
Provincial Governor sent to the Ministry
of Interior. However,
the authorities have not answered yet.
 
At the time of
writing, Ponlok Khmer was still operating. However, the Governor’s letter
represents a serious threat and is a clear attempt to silence Ponlok Khmer,
illustrating the culture of restrictions against human rights defenders and in
particular of land rights activists in the country.


Actions
requested:
 
Please
write to the Cambodian authorities and leaders of the CNRP urging them to:
 
i.       
Put an end to acts of
harassment against Ponlok Khmer, Mr. Lut Sang, Ms. Noun Mon, Ms. Roeung Khann and Ms. Seung
Sang and all human rights defenders in
Cambodia;
 
ii.      Ensure in all circumstances that
they are able to carry out their work without unjustified hindrance and
fear of reprisal;
 
iii.     Comply with all the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly,
in particular:
- Article
1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually or in association
with others, to promote the protection and realization of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, 
- and
Article 12.2 which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures
to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually
and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action
as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in
the present Declaration.”
 
iv.   Guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other
international human rights instruments ratified by Cambodia.
 
Addresses:

 
·      
Mr. Hun Sen, Prime Minister, Office
of the Prime Minister, 41 Russian Federation Blvd, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of
Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 360666 / 855 23 880624 (c/o Council of Ministers),
Email: leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh
/ cppparty@gmail.com 
·      
Mr. Sar Kheng, Minister of Interior,
Ministry of Interior, 275 Norodom Blvd, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: +
855 23 212708. Email: moi@interior.gov.kh
·      
Mr. Ang Vong Vathna, Minister of
Justice, Ministry of Justice, 240 Sothearos Blvd, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of
Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 364119.
·      
Mr. Hor Nam Hong, Minister of
Foreign Affairs, 161 Preah Sisowath Quay, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax:
+ 855 23 216144 / + 855 23 216939. Email: mfaic@mfa.gov.kh 
·      
Ms. Maria
Fariello, Human
Rights Defenders Focal Point, Delegation of the European Union to Cambodia, No. 100 A, Preah Norodom Boulevard, Khan Daun Penh, 12207 Phnom Penh,
Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 216 997 Email: HumanrightsKH@eeas.europa.eu
/ Delegation-Cambodia@eeas.europa.eu
·      
Mr. Ke Sovann, Deputy Permanent
Representative, Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Cambodia to the United Nations
in Geneva, Chemin de Taverney 3, Case postale 213, 1218 Grand-Saconnex,
Switzerland, Fax: + 41 22 788 77 74. Email: camemb.gva@mfa.gov.kh
/ cambodge@bluewin.ch 
 
Please also write to
diplomatic representations of Cambodia in your respective countries.
 
*** 
Geneva-Paris, April 11, 2014
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human
Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.




[1] http://www.ponlokkhmer.org/index.php/en/ 