Statement at the 36th session of the Human Rights Council, Item 6: UPR outcomes - India
September 22, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / 2017 / SeptemberStatement at the 36th session of the Human Rights Council, Item 6: UPR outcomes - India36th
session of the Human Rights Council (11-29 September 2017)Item
6: UPR outcomes - IndiaStatement
delivered by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), People's Watch, the
Working Group on Human Rights in India and the UN, and Human Rights Defenders'
Alert-India
Thank you Mr. President.
The OMCT, People's
Watch, the Working Group on Human Rights in India and the UN, and Human Rights
Defenders' Alert – India welcome the report of the
working group on the UPR of India and appreciate that out of the 250 recommendations
made, 41 addressed torture.
We believe that it remains crucial for India to ratify the Convention
Against Torture and its Optional Protocol, to ensure that domestic legislation defines
torture in line with international standards and to
extend an invitation to the Special Rapporteur on torture for an official visit
to the country. 
However, we regret that not a single State made recommendations to
the government with respect to pressing issues such as the lack of prompt and
thorough investigations into allegations of torture and the continuing impunity
of perpetrators.
We deeply regret Mr. Mukul Rohatgi's comment stating that “the concept of torture is completely alien
to our culture and it has no place in the governance of the nation.” Torture
is endemic in the country and has been increasingly used as a tool of
intimidation against minorities, dalits, adivasis and the poor and
marginalized, as well as a tool to curb political dissent, both by the police
and non-state actors. Moreover, police being bound by “ties of brotherhood” seldom register cases of torture and often
intimidate witnesses and victims in the absence of a protective legal
framework.
Finally, we regret that the National Human Rights Commission did not
reiterate in its last report to the UPR its call for the adoption of a
strengthened anti-torture law - a draft of which is pending since 2010. We also
remain concerned about the lack of political will to move forward with the
criminalization of torture, which would reflect India's commitment towards its
international obligations.
Thank you. 