Bahrain:  Immediate investigation should be launched into allegations of torture
January 26, 2009
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2009 / JanuaryBahrain: Immediate investigation should be launched into allegations of tortureGeneva - Paris, January 26, 2009. The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) express their deep concern about the allegations of torture and ill-treatment of fourteen Bahraini citizens, currently detained at Dry Dock Jail, by National Security Apparatus in order to extract confessions. According to the information received, on December 15, 2008, Bahraini authorities carried out a wave of arrests which they later explained as the consequence of the uncovering of an alleged “Terror Plot”. Thirteen youths were arrested by the National Security Apparatus and their whereabouts remained unknown until December 28, 2008, when a Government-owned and run TV “Bahrain Satellite” channel broadcasted a pre-recorded video displaying unrelated images of violence amidst alleged confessions of some of the detainees. The second day, daily newspapers published these confessions, names and pictures of the arrested people, among them those shown in the TV broadcast. The thirteen individuals are Ahmed Yousef Al-Same’a (26 years), Mohammed Jamil Taher Al-Same’a (22 years) and Ali Jamil Taher Al-Same’a (28 years) all from Sanabis village, Mohamed Abdullah Abdulhusain Al-Shargi (32 years), Mohamed Ja’afar Isa Ebrahim (32 years), Hassan Jassim Mohammed and Fathi Jassim Makki Jassim all from Jidahfs village, Yaseen Ali Mushaima (21 years) from Daih village, Hasan Ali Fateel (27 years) from Sar village, Mohammad Khalil Ibrahim Al-Medawob (28 years) from Jeblat Hebshi village, Mohammed Hassan Saleh Al-Jazeeri (20years) from Karranah village, Mohsen Ahmed Al-Gassab (31 years) and Mohamed Salaman Abdul-Rasool. While some of them were reportedly later able to meet with their lawyers and families, others remain detained incommunicado (including Mohammad Khalil Ibrahim Al-Medawob, Mohammed Jamil Taher Al-Same and Yaseen Ali Mushaima). Those who met with their lawyers reported that they were not aware of having been videotaped during interrogation and that they had been subjected to torture and ill-treatment in order to confess their participation in a terror plot. No charges have yet been brought against them. According to the reports of their lawyers, the detainees were subjected to: electrocution in the armpits and in the genital organs; hanging up for long hours with tied hands, and beating on sensitive areas on the body; Falaqa[1]; solitary confinement and forcing to stand for long hours with hands tied and eyes folded, with deprivation of sleep and going to the lavatory, and insulting. On December 21, 2008 Mr. Abdul-Redha Hassan Al-Saffar, a human rights defender, well-known for his role in organizing peaceful sit-ins in collaboration with the families of detainees and the Unemployed Committee, was also arrested from his residence in Mahooz village and remains detained. He was also reportedly subjected to torture and ill-treatment[2]. No charges have yet been brought against him. It is also reported that six individuals, including a minor, namely Sami Ahmed Muftah (30 years) from Tubly village, Sayed Ali Sayed Shubber (30 years) from Jed Haffs Village, Ali Abdulhadi Mushamai (19 years) from Al-Daih Village, Abbas Jameel Taher Al-samee (19 years) from Sananbis village, Hussain Ali Jummah (15 year) from Hamad Town, Abdulredah Taher Al- Samee (26 years) from al Sanabis village, were violently arrested between 12 and 19 January 2009 by the National Security Apparatus and held since then detained incommunicado allegedly for the same case. However, no further information is currently available on their situation. OMCT and FIDH are highly concerned about these allegations of torture and ill-treatment and urge the Bahraini authorities to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of all the detainees and to ensure an unconditional access to their lawyers, families as well as to appropriate medical care. The organisations further urge the authorities to immediately launch a prompt, thorough and independent investigation into these allegations and guarantee that no evidence obtained under torture be used in any proceedings as stipulated in Article 15 of the UN Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, to which Bahrain acceded. Finally, both organisations urge the authorities to order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent with international law and standards, or if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at every stage of the proceedings. For further information, please contact: FIDH: Gaël Grilhot, + 00 33 1 43 55 25 18 OMCT: Eric Sottas, + 00 41 22 809 49 39     [1] which is inserting a solid bar between the arms and legs after tying them, and hanging the detainee between two props where the body is kept hanging in the air, with head and leg positioned upside down, then the feet are beaten with a solid bar.   [2] See The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint Programme by OMCT and FIDH, urgent appeal BHR 001 / 0109 / OBS 003. 