Spain:  On the trial against Judge Baltasar Garzón: The application of international law to the crimes of the Spanish Civil War and the Franco regime does not constitute criminal malfeasance
January 19, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Spain / 2012 / JanuarySpain: On the trial against Judge Baltasar Garzón: The application of international law to the crimes of the Spanish Civil War and the Franco regime does not constitute criminal malfeasanceSpain_On the trial against Judge Baltasar Garzón2 pages / 1.80 MBOn the trial against Judge Baltasar 
Garzón:
The application of international law to the crimes 
of the Spanish Civil War
and the Franco regime does not constitute criminal 
malfeasance
 

In 
May 2010 Spain caught the attention of the world when the Supreme Court 
suspended as a result of a criminal malfeasance investigation opened against 
Judge Baltasar Garzón, the only judge to have challenged the lack of 
accountability relating to the crimes committed during the Spanish Civil war and 
the subsequent Franco Regime. 
 
The 
crime of malfeasance, with which Judge Garzón has been charged, concerns 
misconduct in the administration of justice and sanctions judges for making 
unjust judicial decisions. In October 2008 Judge Baltasar Garzón established the 
jurisdiction of the Audiencia National, applying the principle that crimes 
against humanity cannot be subject to statutes of limitation or amnesty.  He authorized the investigation into the 
alleged disappearance, torture and execution of 114.266 persons, identified as 
victims, between 17 July 1936 and December 1951. 

 
Since authorizing the malfeasance investigation against Judge 
Garzón, the Supreme Court has endeavored to keep the case away from the 
spotlight of international scrutiny, refusing even to allow the testimony of 
expert witnesses in international law during the 
trial.
 
Hearings in what has been termed the ‘historic memory’ case against 
Judge Garzón begin on 24 January 2012. This trial, if successful, could 
represent the final seal of impunity for those responsible for crimes committed 
during the Civil War and the Franco regime in Spain. Alternatively, it could 
finally clear a path for the country to begin a new era of justice for victims 
of past crimes never before investigated by the Spanish justice 
system.
 


The 
Supreme Court in its decisions so far has maintained the supremacy of national 
law – including the 1977 Amnesty Law – above the principles of international 
law. It has also affirmed that judicial actions must remain separate from 
legislative action and political agreements which, according to the Court, 
legitimize the 1977 Amnesty Law and make it distinct from others that have been 
repealed in other parts of the world. The Supreme Court has not recognized the 
role of the judiciary in taking corrective action where domestic law contradicts 
the principles and norms of international law. The Supreme Court in this respect 
has authorised the investigation and prosecution of crimes against humanity 
committed in foreign countries, but has taken a contradictory position in 
respect of similar crimes alleged in Spain. 
 
For 
this reason, national and international human rights organizations have spoken 
out against the attack on judicial independence in Spain represented by this 
trial. We have also warned of the nefarious precedent that the prevalent vision 
in the Supreme Court presents, regarding both access to justice for the victims 
of the Civil War and the Franco regime and, more generally, for the conduct of 
national courts around the world. The trial of Judge Garzón for the crime of 
criminal malfeasance has implications that reach far beyond Spain’s 
borders.
 
The 
panel of Supreme Court judges which will hear Judge Garzón’s arguments has the 
opportunity to correct the dangerous course initiated in the pre-trial phase 
where the investigation for criminal malfeasance was inappropriately authorized. 
Any criminal offence such as malfeasance by judicial officers needs to be 
applied cautiously, so as not to undermine the independence of the judiciary or 
to sanction a judge for following an accepted interpretation of international 
law.  

 
The 
panel of the Supreme Court has the option of complying with the provision of 
Spanish Constitution establishing that international law forms part of Spanish 
law (Art. 10.2 and 96), rather than persevering with a misguided move to punish 
a judge for applying international law standards –such as the principle that 
crimes against humanity cannot be subject to statutes of limitations or amnesty. 
In other words, the Supreme Court has the possibility of becoming the guarantor 
of human rights, as judges in other parts of the world have done, or of breaking 
with international law and standards and so destroying the possibility of access 
to justice for the victims of serious violations of human rights such as those 
that took place during the Spanish Civil War and the Franco regime. 

 
Spain itself is obliged to assure conformity with 
international treaties to which it is a party. The State has a clear obligation 
to investigate unlawful killings, torture, enforced disappearances and other 
crimes under international law committed during the Civil War and the Franco 
regime. 
 
The Council of Europe’s Guidelines 
on 
eradicating 
impunity for serious human rights 
violations establishes a guarantee that is especially important in this 
context. It states that safeguards should be put in place to ensure that lawyers, prosecutors 
and judges do not fear reprisals for exercising their functions in these types 
of cases.
 
The signatory organizations call on 
the Supreme Court to act in accordance with the duty to guarantee the 
constitutional and international laws that define its jurisdictional function 
with regard to the international obligations taken on by Spain; with regard to 
the standards of justice warranted in a trial involving a judge of the Spanish 
magistracy; and with respect to judicial independence concerning, above, all, 
the rights of victims of crimes under international 
law.
Asociación Pro Derechos Humanos
de España (APDHE) 









Center for Constitutional Rights (CCR)









Due Process of Law Foundation (DPLF) 







European Centre for Constitutional and
Human Rights (ECCHR) 







Human Rights Watch 







International Commission of Jurists
(ICJ) 







Lawyers’ Rights Watch Canada (LRWC) 







Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for
Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) 







Rights International Spain – Grupo de
Trabajo por la Justicia Internacional y los Derechos Humano

 

January 19, 2012 