Belarus:  Arbitrary arrest and subsequent release of seven observers of the Human Rights Center Viasna and the Belarusian Helsinki Committee (BHC), and obstacles to the right to peaceful assembly.
March 28, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Belarus / 2018 / MarchBelarus: Arbitrary arrest and subsequent release of seven observers of the Human Rights Center Viasna and the Belarusian Helsinki Committee (BHC), and obstacles to the right to peaceful assembly.
URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
 
BLR
001 / 0318 / OBS 035
Obstacles to freedom of assembly /
Arbitrary arrest / Judicial harassment
Release
Belarus
March 28, 2018

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Belarus.
 
Description
of the situation:
 
The Observatory has
been informed by reliable sources about the arbitrary arrest and subsequent
release of Mr. Maksim Kavaliou, Ms. Tatsiana Mastykina, Mr. Andrus Krechka, Mr. Ihar Bahachou, Ms. Nasta Loika, Ms. Hanna
Sakhankova, and Ms. Nasta Vasilchuk, observers of the Human Rights
Center Viasna and the Belarusian Helsinki Committee (BHC), as well as about obstacles
to the right to peaceful assembly. 
 
According to the
information received, on March 25, 2018, the seven human rights defenders were
arrested during an unauthorised demonstration in Yakub Kolas Square, Minsk,
organised to commemorate the 100th anniversary of Belarus’ proclamation of
independence. The seven observers mandated by the HRC Viasna and the BHC were
part of the observation delegation monitoring the demonstration and were
wearing an armband signalling them as observers.
 
While at the Sovetskyi
police station, Mr. Maksim Kavaliou, Ms. Tatsiana Mastykina, Mr. Andrus
Krechka, Mr. Ihar Bahachou, Ms. Nasta Loika and Ms. Hanna Sakhankova were
ordered to face the wall outside, with their hands up and their personal
belongings on the ground. Their bags were searched, and the police officers
took their photos and fingerprints. Ms. Tatsiana Mastykina refused to obey and
was taken away, forcibly fingerprinted, and was held by her hair when
photographing. All six of them were released the same day.
 
Ms. Nasta Vasilchuk
was detained at the Pervomaiskyi police station in Minsk and released without
drawing up a detention protocol.
 
Mr. Maksim Kavaliou,
Ms. Tatsiana Mastykina, Mr. Andrus Krechka, Mr. Ihar Bahachou and Ms. Nasta
Loika were charged with “participation in unauthorised mass gatherings” under
Article 23.34 of the Code of Administrative Offences. Ms. Tatsiana Mastykina
was additionally charged with “resisting demands of a public official” under Article 23.4 of the same Code.
They were supposed to appear before the Soviet District Court on March 26,
2018, but the hearings were cancelled without any postponed date.
 
The police also
detained several dozen protesters and four journalists of the Belsat TV
channel. At least 120 people were detained in connection with the demonstration
throughout the country.
 
The Observatory
strongly condemns the arbitrary arrest of Mr. Maksim Kavaliou, Ms. Tatsiana
Mastykina, Mr. Andrus Krechka, Mr. Ihar Bahachou, Ms. Nasta Loika, Ms. Hanna
Sakhankova and Ms. Nasta Vasilchuk, as well as the judicial harassment of five
of them, as it appears to be a retaliation of their legitimate and peaceful
human rights activities.
 
The Observatory urges
Belarusian authorities to put an end to all forms of harassment, including at
the judicial level against them and to uphold international human rights
standards to which Belarus is bound with respect to freedom of assembly.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Belarus,
urging them to:
 
i. Put an end to any form of
harassment, including at the judicial level, against Mr. Maksim Kavaliou, Ms. Tatsiana
Mastykina, Mr. Andrus Krechka, Mr. Ihar Bahachou, Ms. Nasta Loika, Ms. Hanna
Sakhankova and Ms. Nasta Vasilchuk as well as all human rights defenders in Belarus;
 
ii. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical
and psychological integrity of all human rights defenders in Belarus;
 
iii. Comply
with all their international obligations to respect the exercise of the
citizens' right to freedom of association and assembly, as established in the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, in particular its
Articles 21 and 22;
 
iv. Comply with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, in particular with its Articles 1, 2, 5 and 12.2;
 
v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Belarus.

Addresses:
 
·      
President Aliaksandr Lukashenka, Belarus, Fax: + 375
172 26 06 10 or + 375 172 22 38 72, Email: contact@president.gov.by
·      
General Prosecutor, Alexander Konyuk, Belarus, Fax: +
375 17 226 42 52
·      
Minister of Justice of Belarus, Mr. Oleg
Slizhevsky, Email: kanc@minjust.by, Fax: + 375 17 200 86 87
·      
Chairman of the State Control Committee of Belarus,
Mr. Leonid
V Anfimov,
Email: kgk@mail.belpak.by
·      
H.E. Mr. Yury Ambrazevich, Permanent Mission of
Belarus to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 748 24 51.
Email: mission.belarus@ties.itu.int
·      
H.E. Mr. Aleksandr Mikhnevich, Embassy of Belarus in
Brussels, Fax: + 32 2.340.02.87, Email: belgium@mfa.gov.by
 
Please also write to
the diplomatic representations of Belarus in your respective countries.
 
***
 
Paris-Geneva, March 28, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu
, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.
 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·      
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33
(0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41
(0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29 