Saudi Arabia:  Secret detention of Messrs. Waleed Imam and Algasim Mohamed Sidahmed
January 17, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Saudi Arabia / 2017 / JanuarySaudi Arabia: Secret detention of Messrs. Waleed Imam and Algasim Mohamed Sidahmed





SAU 002 / 0117 / OBS 005
Incommunicado and secret detention
Saudi Arabia / Sudan
January 17, 2017
 
The Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the
following situation in Saudi Arabia.
 
Description of the
situation:
 
The Observatory has been
informed by reliable sources about the arrest and detention of Messrs. Waleed
Imam and Algasim Mohamed Sidahmed, two Sudanese social media
activists residing in Saudi Arabia, where they continue advocating for the
respect of human rights in Sudan. 
 
According to the information received, on
December 20, 2016, two units of Saudi security forces arrested Messrs. Waleed
Imam and Algasim Mohamed Sidahmed, as they were heading to their cars outside
their workplace in Riyadh. Following their arrest, they were taken to their
homes where four security personnel searched their houses before taking them to
an unknown place. No arrest or search warrants were presented during the search
and Mr. Waleed Imam was prevented from communicating with his wife who was
standing in the next room.
 
Mr. Algasim Mohamed Sidahmed, whose mobile phone
was confiscated during the search, called his wife at around 2 am for only 40
seconds from a prison in Riyadh. They have been held incommunicado since their
arrest. No reason for their arrest has been given and their whereabouts remain
unknown as of publication of this appeal.
 
According to information received, several
officials of the Sudanese National Intelligence and Security Service (NISS)
would have since arrived in Saudi Arabia in order to interrogate the
two above-mentioned human rights defenders.
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the arrest and
incommunicado and secret detention of Messrs. Waleed Imam and Algasim Mohamed
Sidahmed. These cases illustrate the repressive trend targeting Sudanese human
rights defenders residing abroad as the Sudanese Government exercises pressure
to harass its nationals carrying out human rights activities abroad.
 
The Observatory further fear that the two would
be at risk of torture and ill-treatment if they were sent back to Sudan, which
would be contrary to Saudi Arabia’s obligations under Article 3 of the United
Nations Convention against Torture.
 
The Observatory urges authorities in Saudi
Arabia to immediately disclose the whereabouts of Messrs. Waleed Imam and
Algasim Mohamed Sidahmed and release them immediately and unconditionally as their
detention is arbitrary since it only seems to aim at sanctioning their
human rights activities.
 
Background information:
 
Founding members of Abna’
Al-Sahafa (Citizen of Al-Sahafa) in Khartoum, Messrs. Waleed Imam and Algasim Mohamed Sidahmed were providing assistance
and basic services to Sudanese people in need. 
 
Since they left Sudan to
Saudi Arabia for work reasons in 1998 and 2013 respectively, they have remained
active in the organisation from Riyadh, providing logistic and financial
support for those in need of medicine and medical treatment in Sudan. Moreover,
Mr. Algasim Mohamed
Sidahmed is managing a Facebook page
that has over 80,000 members calling for peaceful political transformation in
Sudan. He was active during the recent civil disobedience movement in Sudan.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Saudi Arabia and ask them to:
 
i.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Messrs. Waleed Imam and Algasim Mohamed Sidahmed and all human rights defenders in Saudi Arabia;
 
ii.
Immediately disclose the whereabouts of Messrs. Waleed Imam
and Algasim Mohamed Sidahmed and release them immediately
and unconditionally as
their detention is arbitrary since it only seems to aim at sanctioning
their human rights activities;
 
iii. Guarantee the access of Messrs. Messrs. Waleed Imam and
Algasim Mohamed Sidahmed to their lawyers;
 
iv.
Put an end to all acts of harassment - including at the judicial level -
against Messrs. Waleed Imam
and Algasim Mohamed Sidahmed and all human rights defenders in
Saudi Arabia;
 
v.
Conform in any circumstances with the provisions of the United Nations
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the UN
General Assembly, in particular its Articles 1, 6, 8, 9 and 12.2;
 
vi.
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
in accordance with international human rights instruments ratified by Saudi
Arabia, and
most notably to comply with Article 3 of the Convention against Torture (CAT),
to which Saudi Arabia is a party, which states that “no State Party shall
expel, return (“refouler”) or extradite a person to another State where there
are substantial grounds for believing that he would be in danger of being
subjected to torture”.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
His Majesty, King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, King of Saudi Arabia and
Custodian of the two Holy Mosques, Fax: (via Ministry of the Interior) +966 11
403 3125; Email: info@moi.gov.sa
·     H.E. Waleed bin Mohammad Al Samaani,
Minister of Justice, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Fax: + 966 11 401 1741 / + 966 11
402 0311 / +966114055399
·    
His Royal Highness Prince Mohammed bin Naif bin Abdul Aziz Al Saud,
Minister of Interior, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Fax: +966 11 403 3125; Email: info@moi.gov.sa
·     H.E. Adel bin Ahmed El Jubeir,
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax: +966114030645; Email: info@mofa.gov.sa
·     H.E. Abdulaziz Alwasil,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to the United
Nations Office in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 758 00 00. Email: saudiamission@bluewin.ch
·    
H.E. Abdulrahman bin Soliman Al-Ahmed, Ambassador, Embassy of Saudi
Arabia in Brussels, Belgium. Fax: +32 2 6468538. Email: beemb@mofa.gov.sa
 
Please also write to
diplomatic representations of Saudi Arabia in your respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, January 17, 2017
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the
protection of human rights defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in
their time of need. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society. 