Morocco:  Raid on the premises of the Moroccan Association of Human Rights (AMDH) and assault against a human rights activist
February 19, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Morocco / 2015 / FebruaryMorocco: Raid on the premises of the Moroccan Association of Human Rights (AMDH) and assault against a human rights activist Maroc_190215_EN2 pages / 90 KB​MOROCCO: Raid on the premises of the Moroccan Association of Human
Rights (AMDH) and assault against a human rights activist 
 
Paris – Geneva - Copenhagen, 19 February 2015 – The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of FIDH and OMCT, along
with the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN) and the Euro-Med
Federation against Enforced Disappearances (FEMED), condemn the raid on the
premises of the Moroccan Association of Human Rights (Association marocaine
des droits humains – AMDH) and the assault against one of its members by
the Moroccan security forces. 
 
During the evening of Sunday 15 February 2015,
Moroccan security forces accompanied by about forty individuals in plain
clothes armed with metal bars, broke into the premises of the AMDH which had
been surrounded by the security forces since the morning. During the raid, a member of the secretariat and of the association’s
administrative committee, Ms. Rabea Bouzidi, was physically and verbally
assaulted. While attempting to wrest from her the keys of her apartment and
those of the premises of the association, four men fell her and maintained her
on the ground where she could no longer breathe. She was then brought to
hospital in worrying conditions. The security forces had already tried to enter
the premises earlier that day but had been prevented by the association
president, M. El Haij, who demanded that they produce a warrant.
 
This raid was due to the presence on the premises of the AMDH of two
French journalists, Jean Louis Perez and Pierre Chautard, of the Première Ligne
Agency, who had come to propose to the members of the association to interview
them about the “20 February Movement”. The two journalists were in Morocco to work
on a documentary on the Moroccan economy for France 3.  
 
The authorities confiscated their material, including their cell phones,
on the ground that they had not yet received an authorisation, despite a
request the journalists had submitted several weeks earlier.[1] On February 16, they were forced to leave Morocco
without their material, including their reporting. 
 
The Observatory, the EMHRN and the FEMED condemn the assault against Ms.
Rabea Bouzidi and the raid on the premises of the AMDH, as they both constitute
a serious obstacle to the exercise of freedom of association. Our organisations
are concerned about the acts of violence committed by the security forces
against human rights defenders and, more generally, deplore the increasing
restrictions on freedoms of information, association and assembly in Morocco
during the last several months.[2]
 
Our organisations call on the Moroccan government to ensure the security
of both the members and the premises of all the human rights organisations and
to guarantee in all circumstances the right to freedom of association of human
rights defenders, in particular those that the journalists may have met, in
conformity with article 29 of the Moroccan Constitution, article 22 of the
International Covenant on civil and political rights (ICCPR) and article 5.b of
the Declaration on human rights defenders adopted by the United Nations General
Assembly on 9 December 1998.
 
 
For further information, please contact:
·        
FIDH: Arthur
Manet / Audrey Couprie: presse@fidh.org / +33 1 43 55 25 18
·        
OMCT: Miguel
Martin:+41 22 809 49 22
·        
EMHRN: Hayet Zeghiche : hze@euromedrights.net /+32 488 08 00 41     
·      FEMED: Nassera Dutour, secretariat.femed@disparitions-euromed.org, +33 7 60 21 06 22




[1]     The journalists, who had
submitted an authorisation request to the authorities, believed however they
were operating legally, as they had not received any reply. They were preparing
to follow up on their authorisation request on 16 February. 


[2]     See press statements of the
Observatory dated 29 July 2014 and 7 October 2014, and of the EMHRN dated 2
October 2014, as well as the open
letter of the EMHRN to the Ministry of Interior Mohamed Hassad of 26
November 2014 (French only) and
the open letter to the European Union dated 5 December
2014 (French only). 