Algeria:  Allow Rights Groups to Visit - No Response from Algiers to Requests from UN Bodies
February 11, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Algeria / 2014 / FebruaryAlgeria: Allow Rights Groups to Visit - No Response from Algiers to Requests from UN BodiesARABIC_Allow Rights Groups to Visit - No Response from Algiers to Requests from UN Bodies2 pages / 441 KB

For Immediate Release

Algeria: Allow Rights Groups to Visit

No Response from Algiers to Requests from UN Bodies

Tuesday,
February 11, 2014 – Algeria should uphold the values of the United Nations
Human Rights Council by allowing UN human rights experts and international
human rights nongovernmental organizations to visit the country, five human
rights organizations said today. Algeria joined the Human Rights Council in
January 2014.

“As a
member of the UN Human Rights Council, Algeria has pledged to cooperate with
regional and international human rights organizations. Yet, the
Algerian authorities have not agreed to visits by the UN Special Rapporteur on
Torture and the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances,
despite their repeated requests”, said Philip Luther, Middle East and North
Africa director at Amnesty International. This pattern is also reflected in
restricted access for other human rights observers. Algerian authorities have
refused to grant visas to international human rights nongovernmental
organizations for several years, and have violated in many ways the right of
Algerian human rights organizations to operate freely.

“Algeria
remains the only country among its neighbors that generally restricts access to
human rights organizations,” said Eric Goldstein, deputy Middle East and North
Africa director at Human Rights Watch. “Since 2011, our organizations have
regularly visited Morocco, Libya, and Tunisia with few if any obstacles.” 

The
groups that are making the appeal to the Algerian government to allow human
rights groups access to the country are Amnesty International,
Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network, Human Rights Watch and the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint program of the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), and the World Organization
Against Torture (OMCT).International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH)International Federation for Human Rights and World Organisation against
Torturee

“Algeria should end the farce of refusing any
scrutiny of its own human rights record while sitting on the Human Rights
Council”, said Karim Lahidji, president of the FIDH. 
 
“Granting visas to international human rights organizations
and inviting UN human rights experts would signal a genuine commitment that the
Algerian authorities will seriously engage with the UN Human Rights Council”,
added Gerald Staberock,
secretary general of the OMCT.

“All our organizations have submitted several
official requests to visit the country in 2013 and before but Algerian
authorities either refused, did not respond, or imposed conditions for access
that would not have allowed us to conduct a research mission freely,” said Michel Tubiana,
president of the EMHRN. 

By successfully running for Human Rights
Council membership, Algeria is expected to “uphold the highest standards in the
promotion and protection of human rights” under UN General Assembly Resolution
60/251. However, in 2012, Algerian authorities adopted
a new law on associations more repressive than the previous one.

Law No. 12-06 forbids associations
from receiving any foreign funding or cooperating with or seeking membership in
foreign organizations without the government’s agreement. The law also
requires all associations already registered under the previous law to submit
organizational bylaws that comply with the new legislation, by January 15. All existing
associations not successfully registered under the new law can be considered
illegal, exposing their members to penalties of up to 6 months in prison and a
300,000 Algerian dinar (€2,800/ US$3,800) fine.

The
groups said that if Algeria’s three-year term as a member of the Human Rights
Council is to be meaningful, the Algerian authorities should:  
 
·      
Cooperate fully with the Human Rights Council, including
its human rights experts known as special procedures, in particular by promptly
facilitating their requests to visit, by issuing and honoring standing
invitations to UN human rights experts and working groups, and by acting
promptly on their recommendations and communications;
·      
Repeal those articles of Law No. 12-06 on
associations that
violate freedom of association and the right of associations to cooperate with
and belong to organizations based in other countries;
·      
Ensure in all circumstances that human rights defenders and
all activists in Algeria can fully exercise their rights to freedom of
expression, association and peaceful assembly without fear of harassment or
interference; 
·      
Grant visas without delay to representatives of
international human rights organizations who ask to visit Algeria.
 
 
All UN Human Rights Council member
countries should urge Algerian authorities to carry out the recommendations
listed above, the five organizations said.



For more information,
please contact:
In
London, for Amnesty International, Philip Luther: +44-203-036-5916
In Brussels, for the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network, Hayet Zeghiche:
+32-488-08-00-41
In Washington, DC, for Human Rights Watch, Eric Goldstein: +1-917-519-4736
In Paris, for the International Federation for Human Rights, Arthur Manet and
Audrey Couprie: +33-1-43-55-25-18
In Geneva, for the World Organization Against Torture, Delphine Reculeau:
+41-22-809-49-39 