Congo, Democratic Republic:  DRC: Arrest, Ill-treatment and release of Mr. Masua
April 28, 2006
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Congo, Democratic Republic / 2006 / AprilCongo, Democratic Republic: DRC: Arrest, Ill-treatment and release of Mr. MasuaCase COD 280406Arbitrary Arrest / Ill-treatment / Release  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC).  Brief Description of the SituationThe International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by several reliable sources of the ill-treatment by soldiers of the Republican Guard of Mr. Anselme Masua, journalist at radio Okapi, a joint project of the United Nations Mission in Congo (MONUC) and the Swiss Foundation Hirondelle.  According to the information received, on 24 April 2006, Mr. Anselme Masua went to the parish Saint Joseph in the area of Tshopo, Kisangani, where the residency of the Head of State in the city of Kisangani is located and kept under surveillance by soldiers of the Republican Guard. Mr. Anselme Masua, who identified himself while entering this camp, wanted to check his information about the mixing of the troops of the Republican Guard, which has to be reformed before its integration into the new Congolese national army.  When he arrived at the camp, a lieutenant brought Mr. Anselme Masua to the Commander in charge of the detachment of the Republican Guard present. The commander, named "Captain Jules", insulted the journalist before ordering that he be beaten by his men, claiming that he had conducted acts of espionage at Saint Joseph. Mr. Masua did not have the possibility to reply to these accusations. Furthermore, the Commander ordered that he be taken brought to the base of Shingi Shingi, 4 kilometres away from Kisangani. During his transfer, Mr. Anselme Masua was beaten by the soldiers of the Republican Guard with the butts of rifles. Later on, during the transfer of Mr. Masua, "Captain Jules" realised that Mr. Maua did not aim at spying on the camp. The Commander thus ordered his soldiers by phone to turn back and leave the journalist at the MONUC headquarters in Kisangani.  The International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its deep concern over the arbitrary arrest and ill-treatment of Mr. Anselme Masua, and urges the Congolese government to order a thorough and impartial investigation into the alleged facts. Action requestedPlease write a letter to the authorities in the Democratic Republic of Congo urging them to: i.	Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Anselme Masua; ii.	Order a thorough, independent and impartial investigation into these events, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the criminal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iii.	Guarantee that adequate compensation is granted to Mr. Anselme Masua; iv.	Ensure the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards. Addresses Le Président de la République, S.E. Joseph Kabila, Présidence de la République, Kinshasa-Ngaliema, République Démocratique du Congo, E-mail: upp@ic.cd   Le Vice-Président de la République en Charge de la Commission Politique, Défense et Sécurité, M. Azarias Ruberwa Manywa, Cabinet du Vice-Président de la République, avenue roi Baudouin ex-3Z, Kinshasa/Gombe, République Démocratique du Congo, Email :  vice_presidence.rdc@ic.cd  Le Ministre des Affaires Etrangères et de la Coopération Internationale, M. Ramazani Baya, Cabinet du Ministre, bâtiment du Ministère des Affaires Etrangères, Kinshasa/Gombe, République Démocratique du Congo  Le Ministre de la Justice et Garde des Sceaux, M. Kisimba Ngoy, Ministère de la Justice et Garde des Sceaux, BP 3137, Kinshasa Gombé, République Démocratique du Congo, E-mail: minjustrdc@yahoo.fr  Le Ministre de l’Intérieur, Ministère de l’Intérieur, Fax: +243 88 02 042, E-mail: mininterieur@yahoo.fr  La Ministre des Droits Humains, Mme Marie-Madeleine Kalala, Cabinet du Ministre, Boulevard du 30 juin, Kinshasa/Gombe, République Démocratique du Congo, Fax: 00 243 12 20 664, Email: min_droitshumains@yahoo.fr ou mindroits_humains@yahoo.fr  Observatoire National des Droits de l’Homme (ONDH), Cabinet du Président, avenue Sendwe, Kinshasa/Kalamu, République Démocratique du Congo, Tél: +243 98313740 / + 243 98271199 / + 243 98407633  M. Théo Kiakwima, Directeur adjoint de l’Agence Nationale des Renseignements, Tel : + 243 995 8610  Ambassadeur, Antoine Mindua Kesia-Mbe, Mission permanente de la République démocratique du Congo, Avenue de Budé 18, 1202 Genève, Suisse, e-mail : missionrdc@bluewin.ch, Fax : +4122 740.16.82  Ambassadeur, Mr. Jean-Pierre Mavungu, Ambassade de la République Démocratique du Congo à Bruxelles, Avenue Foestraets, 6, 1180 Bruxelles. Tel: + 32 2 375 47 96, Fax : + 32 2 372 23 48  Please also write to the embassies of the Democratic Republic of Congo in your respective country.  *** Geneva, 1 May 2006  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 