Colombia:  Colombia: 7 killings and mass forced displacement in Bolivar
November  6, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Colombia / 2001 / NovemberColombia: Colombia: 7 killings and mass forced displacement in BolivarCase COL 061101 The International Secretariat of the OMCT requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Colombia. Brief description of the situation: The International Secretariat of the OMCT has been informed of serious human rights violations in rural areas of the Department of Bolívar and of the forced displacement of more than 1500 peasants of Cantagallo and San Pablo (Bolívar), fleeing in the mountains after a gradual armed incursion by the paramilitaries that has left at least seven dead, one wounded and a one month old baby kidnapped. According to information from the “José Alvear Restrepo” Group of Lawyers (Colectivo de Abogados) and from the Peasant Association of the Cimitarra River Valley (Asociación Campesina del Valle del Río Cimitarra), as of October 20 this year, a group of more than 300 armed men has infiltrated the region and has established itself in the localities of La Unión, La Fría, Alto Cañabraval, Monte Carmelo and Villanueva, seemingly without opposition by the civil, ecclesiastic or military authorities. This paramilitary group has committed a number violations of the region’s inhabitants’ human rights, among which are the following:   -On October 22 a man known as “Barranca” was killed in the Corregimiento de Villanueva, and another person wounded. -On October 23, as they crossed the district known as Monte Carmelo, they killed Mrs. Alba María Cano and kidnapped her son, a six month old baby who was kept in the paramilitary base of San Blas, in order to force his father to present himself. Three peasants were also killed, one who is known as Israel and two whose identity is not known.  Houses were ransacked and two burned down. - On October 24 a farmworker, Juan N. was killed in the Caño Frío district -on October 30 the paramilitaries killed Mr. Ómar Benítez, who was stopped at “Puerto Las Escalas”. This wave of terror has resulted in the forced displacement of the inhabitants of nine settlements, the number of homeless families in the region now reaching more than 270.  They must face harsh weather conditions and the onset of hunger. Furthermore, the paramilitaries have started blockading access routes from Barrancabermeja to the bolivarean region, with the purpose of blocking food supplies and forcing the peasants into exile. The information points out that all these incidents are occuring despite the increased militarisation in the South of Bolívar. Forces have recently been reinforced in the municipal fronts and in corregimientos and districts of the region. There are also more soldiers, police agents, agents of the Administrative Department of Security (Departamento Administrativo de Seguridad-DAS), of the F2 and of the General Attorney’s office in the Municipality of San Pablo. The OMCT shares the serious concern of human rights organizations for the security and the physical and psychological integrity of inhabitants of south Bolivar, especially since in recent history this kind of human rights violation has led to large-scale massacres, disappearances, executions and displacements. Requested Action:  Please write to the Colombian Authorities urging them to:  i. take all measures necessary to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned dipalced persons and to locate those who are missing; ii. order a thorough and impartial investigation into the above-mentioned killings and abductions, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to justice and apply the civil, penal or administrative sanctions stipulated by law; iii. fully execute the recommendations made by international and regional human rights organisations, including those of the High Commission for Human Rights, the United Nations Human Rights Commission, the Inter.American Human Rights Commission as well as national and governmental human rights organisations; iv. guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental liberties in all the country in accordance with national law and international human rights norms.  Addresses  · S.E. Álvaro Uribe Vélez, Presidente de la República, Cra. 8 n .7-26, Palacio de Nariño, Santafé de Bogotá. Fax: (+57 1) 566 20 71  · Consejería Presidencial de Derechos Humanos, Calle 7 n . 6-54 Piso 3, Santafé de Bogotá, D. C. Fax: (+57 1) 337 13 51  · General Fernando Tapias Stahelin, Comandante de las Fuerzas Militares, Avenida el Dorado con Cra. 52, Santafé de Bogotá. Fax: (+57 1) 222 29 35; e-mail: siden@mindefensa.gov.co ; pilaque@cgm.mil.co · Mission Permanente de la Colombie auprès de l’Office de las Nations Unies et des institutions spécialisées a Genève. Chemin du Champ d’Anier 17-19, 1209 Genève. Tel : (+41) 22 798 4554, 798 4555. E-mail: mission.colombia@ties.itu.int  Please also write to the embassies of Colombia in your respective country.  Geneva, November 6, 2001 