Saudi Arabia:  Arrest and ongoing arbitrary detention of Ms. Noha Al-Balawi
February  8, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Saudi Arabia / 2018 / FebruarySaudi Arabia: Arrest and ongoing arbitrary detention of Ms. Noha Al-Balawi
SAU 002 /
0218 / OBS 018
Incommunicado
detention / 
Judicial
harassment
Saudi Arabia
February 8,
2018
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH
and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Saudi Arabia.
 
Description
of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by Al Qst about the arrest and ongoing arbitrary
detention of Ms. Noha Al-Balawi, an online advocate for civil and
political rights. In particular, she has advocated for women’s right to drive,
the abolition of the male guardianship and solidarity with prisoners of
conscience, via videos and tweets. She also participated in the “no taxation
without representation” online campaign that started after the authorities
announced the enforcement of an upcoming value-added tax regime.
 
According to
the information received, on January 23, 2018 at noon, the Saudi authorities
detained a relative of Ms. Noha Al-Balawi. The relative was released later,
after Ms. Al-Balawi had accepted to report before the Department of
Investigation and Prosecution Authority in Tabuk. On the same day at 1.30 pm, she went to the police station and
was arrested and placed in detention. 
 
The authorities questioned her on tweets and videos she had posted,
including on a video in which she supports the driving campaign for women and
shows solidarity with the prisoners of conscience in Saudi Arabia[1].
She was also questioned about her connections with the successful campaign on
women’s right to drive, and with the women’s rights and human rights movement
in Saudi Arabia generally. According to the investigating officer, she is
charged under Article 6 of the Anti-Cybercrime Law, which states that “the
punishment for any person who creates or transmits anything prejudicial to
public order shall be a prison term of up to five years and/or a fine of up to
three million riyals (approx EUR 652,273)”. 
 
On February
5, 2018, her detention was renewed for another 35 days. As of now, no lawyer
has been representing Ms. Noha
Al-Balawi. She is detained in the general prison of Tabuk, yet no information
could be collected on her condition of detention. On February 6, 2018, she
started a hunger strike.
 
According to reliable sources, since her arrest the authorities have
been putting out misleading messages to the effect that Ms. Noha al-Balawi
would not be held in detention but is free and at home. Then they promised to
release Ms. Noha al-Balawi within the first five days, in a seemingly attempt
to silence public opinion and expression of solidarity. 
 
The Observatory expresses its utmost concern over the arbitrary detention
of Ms. Noha Al-Balawi, which only seem to aim at sanctioning her peaceful and
legitimate human rights activities, and fears that the authorities intend to
hand down a harsh sentence against her in the absence of any oversight. The
Observatory urges Saudi authorities to release Ms. Noha Al-Balawi immediately and unconditionally and to put
an end to all acts of harassment against her as well as all human rights
defenders in Saudi Arabia. 

Actions
requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities in Saudi Arabia asking them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Noha Al-Balawi as
well as all human rights defenders in Saudi Arabia;
 
ii. Immediately and
unconditionally release Ms. Noha Al Balawi,
as well as all detained human rights defenders in Saudi Arabia, as their
detention is arbitrary since it only aims at punishing them for their
legitimate human rights activities;
 
iii. Put an end to all
forms of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Ms. Noha
Al-Balawi
and all human rights defenders in the country
so they
are able to carry out their work without unjustified hindrance and fear of
reprisal;
 
iv. Comply in all circumstances with all the provisions of the United
Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular its Articles 1,
6(c) and 12.2;
 
v. More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and instruments.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
His Majesty, King Salman
bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, King of Saudi Arabia and Custodian of the two Holy
Mosques, Fax: (via Ministry of the Interior) +966 11 403 3125; Email: info@moi.gov.sa; Twitter: @KingSalman
·    
His Excellency, Mohammad
Bin Salman Al Saud, Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, Fax: (via Ministry of the
Interior) +966 11 403 3125; Email: info@moi.gov.sa
·    
H.E. Waleed bin Mohammad
Al Samaani, Minister of Justice, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Fax: + 966 11 405
7777; Email: info@moj.gov.sa
·    
His Royal Highness Prince Abdulaziz Bin Saud Bin Naif Bin Abdulaziz, Minister of Interior, Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia. Fax: + 966 11 401 1111 / + 966 11 401 1944 / + 966 11 403
1125; Email: info@moi.gov.sa
·    
H.E. Adel bin Ahmed El
Jubeir, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax: + 966 11 403 0645 ; Email: info@mofa.gov.sa
·    
H.E. Abdulaziz Alwasil,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to the United
Nations Office in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 758 00 00. Email: saudiamission@bluewin.ch
·    
H.E. Abdulrahman bin
Soliman Al-Ahmed, Ambassador, Embassy of Saudi Arabia in Brussels, Belgium.
Fax: +32 2 6468538. Email: beemb@mofa.gov.sa
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Saudi Arabia in your respective
countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva,
February 8, 2018
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of human
rights defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.
FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
·       E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·       Tel
and fax FIDH: +33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / 01 43 55 18 80
·      
Tel and fax OMCT: + 41 22 809 49
39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1]            In a YouTube video posted on November 7, 2017, she expressed support for
the driving campaign for women and showed solidarity with the prisoners of
conscience in Saudi Arabia. See in Arabic: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ouOPxJZqNeQ 