Honduras:  Attacks and criminalisation: defenders caught between a rock and a hard place - Preliminary findings of international fact-finding mission
May  3, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Honduras / 2016 / MayHonduras: Attacks and criminalisation: defenders caught between a rock and a hard place - Preliminary findings of international fact-finding missionPR Honduras 030516 ENG3 pages / 127 KBGeneva-Paris, May 3, 2016. The murder of Berta Caceres is emblematic of
the high levels of violence faced by human rights defenders in Honduras.
Moreover, other structural problems such as the misuse of criminal law against
human rights defenders, the impunity for attacks against them, the absence of
effective protective measures and the increasing militarisation, make Honduras
one of the most difficult countries in the region for the defence of human
rights, according to the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders (OMCT-FIDH).
The
plight of human rights defenders in Honduras has received a great deal of
international attention in the weeks that followed the assassination of Berta Cáceres[1],
a human rights defender who was beneficiary of precautionary measures from the
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR).
This
crime, however, is just the tip of the iceberg within the overall context of
high levels of violence against defenders in the Central American country. The
most recent examples of this include the murder of Nelson García, another member of Consejo
Cívico de Organizaciones Populares e Indígenas de Honduras (COPINH),
on March 15, 2016, and 40 further security incidents since July 2015, including
six murders, against members of Lesbian, Gay, Transgender, Bisexual and
Intersex (LGTBI) associations Arcoíris and Asociación Jóvenes en Movimiento (Somos CDC) (AJEM). However,
the full list of attacks against defenders is much longer[2].
The
Observatory’s international mission, which took place from 11 to 15 April (for
more information see below), concluded that the Honduran State should urgently
take effective and comprehensive measures to tackle the aforementioned climate
of violence and attacks against those who defend human rights. In April 2015,
the Honduran National Congress adopted a Law on the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, Journalists, Social Communicators and Justice Operators. While this
is a positive step that recognises the vulnerability of defenders and the
legitimacy of their work, there are some concerns rising from the text of the law,
as well as from its lack of enforcement to date, due to the delay in adopting
an implementing decree. The Observatory urges the State to prioritise the
debate on such decree and to guarantee a meaningful participation of civil
society in the process.

In addition to the implementation of the new law, Honduras must also show a
firm commitment to effectively implement IACHR precautionary measures and to
promote an enabling environment for those who defend human rights. This latter
must include concrete actions to eradicate statements stigmatising defenders’
work made by public authorities and by other actors with strong influence on
society, such as what happened during the Universal Periodic Review (UPR) of
Honduras to the United Nations (UN). Furthermore, the Observatory recommends
putting an end to the growing militarisation of public security in the country,
following the establishment of the military police.
“Institutional and
territorial militarisation, which includes the active participation of the
armed forces in public security tasks, is not only contrary to international
standards, but in addition, as per experiences in other countries of the
region, it results in increased violence and attacks against defenders.
Therefore, instead of increasing militarisation, the State should strengthen
civilian policing, providing it with sufficient resources and ensuring its
compliance with human rights”,
said Miguel Martin Zumalacárregui, Head of the OMCT Brussels office.
The Observatory has also received information about the misuse of
criminal law, often with the complicity or on the initiative of private actors.
This creates a context of intimidation against defenders, including in
particular those who defend land rights and journalists, who have been subjected
to judicial harassment. Criminal charges abusively brought against defenders
include “defamation”, “incitement to violence”, special “usurpation” during
student sit-ins and even “sedition”.
“The reform of the
criminal code initiated by the Honduran Congress represents a historic
opportunity to put it in line with international standards and to improve
definitions in the current code which are excessively vague and imprecise and
therefore allow for the criminalisation of the legitimate activities of human
rights defenders”, said
Helena Solà Martín, Latin America Program Coordinator in the OMCT.

In clear contrast with the numerous processes of criminalisation against
defenders, it is important to highlight the ineffectiveness of the public
prosecutor’s office and the Honduran judiciary in responding to attacks against
defenders. Impunity is a structural problem, caused by the lack of serious
investigations and accountability. A specific unit must be established within
the public prosecutor’s office to deal with cases against LGBTI defenders, one
of the most vulnerable groups in Honduras. This unit must be sufficiently
equipped with resources to provide a more frequent and effective response to
increasing attacks against members of the LGBTI community. Moreover, the
Observatory has received numerous testimonies describing worrying patterns
aiming at preventing or deterring defenders from filing complaints, including
life-threatening attacks and threats of retaliation.
The Observatory has also received consistent information from members of
the Zacate Grande and San Francisco de Locomapa communities, among others,
which demonstrate that concessions of land and natural resources, without the
free, prior and informed consent of communities, are closely related to the
high rates of attacks and criminalisation against land rights defenders.

“In
March, the UN Human Rights Council adopted a resolution, promoted by a number
of States including Honduras, aiming at improving protection for defenders of
economic, social and cultural rights. In the current context, and to reaffirm
their commitment to address the structural causes of attacks against land
rights defenders, the effective implementation of the International Labour
Organisation Convention 169 on Indigenous and Tribal Peoples should be a
priority”, said Anabella Sibrián, Central
America Representative of the International Platform against Impunity.
Context: 

The Observatory carried out a fact-finding mission in
Honduras between April 11 and 15, 2016, aimed at analysing the situation of
human rights defenders in the Central American country, with a special emphasis
on land rights defenders and defenders of the LGBTI community.
The
Observatory mission held interviews with officials from a number of public institutions,
including the Supreme Court and the National Human Rights Commissioner, which
we would like to thank for their collaboration. The mission also met with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (UN OHCHR) in
Honduras and with the embassies of the European Union (EU) and the Kingdom of
Spain. The mission also heard testimonies from human rights defenders and
representatives of civil society organisations in various meetings in San Pedro
Sula, Tegucigalpa, the Zacate Grande peninsula and the department of Santa
Bárbara.
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the FIDH. The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human
rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.For further information, please contact:
· OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: +32 2
218 37 19 / Helena Solà Martín: +41 22 809 49 39
·
FIDH: Audrey
Couprie: +33 1 43 55 25 18 / José Carlos Thissen : +51 95 41 31 650



[1] See,
for example, the European Parliament Resolution of
April 14, 2016.


[2] According to a recent report by the Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights, between 2010 and 2015, 3,064 defenders were criminalised, 22 killed, 2
disappeared, 15 kidnapped, 88 were victims of theft of information and 53 of
sabotage of their means of transport. 