Kenya:  Four years after the signing into law of the PBO Act, Kenyan civil society is still under attack
January 13, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kenya / 2017 / JanuaryKenya: Four years after the signing into law of the PBO Act, Kenyan civil society is still under attack
KEN 001 / 0117 / OBS 004
Harassment
/ 
Smear
campaign
Kenya
January
13, 2017
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Kenya.
Description of the situation:
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about a new campaign of harassment from the NGO Coordination Board targeting
Kenyan civil society, four years after the signing into law of the Public
Benefit Organisation (PBO) Act 2013 on January 14, 2013.
According to the information received, Kenya’s NGO Coordination Board
has been leading a smear campaign targeting the Kenya Human Rights Commission (KHRC),
an organisation working to foster human rights, democratic values, human
dignity and social justice within the country, accusing the organisation
of financial and management impropriety, as part of a wider trend of harassment
targeting civil society in the country.
On January 6, 2017 the NGO Coordination Board approached KHRC through
email, threatening them to commence an inquiry into allegations of a number of
acts of mismanagement and offences allegedly perpetrated by KHRC, which were
included in an “internal memorandum” issued by the NGO Board on November 4,
2016.
It has to be stressed that KHRC learnt about this memorandum from media reports,
which widely distributed the document. The document addressed several
government agencies with a number of recommendations against KHRC. It advised
the Central Bank of Kenya to take steps to freeze KHRC’s bank accounts. It
requested the Directorate of Criminal Investigation to commence criminal
investigations against KHRC and the Kenya Revenue Authority to commence
measures to recover taxes that KHRC purportedly owes the government. The
document contained further recommendations for the Institute of Certified
Public Accountants, the authority that regulates the public accountancy
profession, to commence investigations against the two audit firms working for
KHRC, PWC and PKF[1].
The
Observatory recalls that is not the first time that the NGO Board is publicly
discrediting KHRC and other human rights organisations in Kenya[2].
On October 29, 2015, the NGO Coordination Board announced that it would cancel
the registration of 957 NGOs, among which KHRC, because the concerned
organisations had failed to account for funds and were supporting terrorism.
Nonetheless, the Board declined to meet or to reply to correspondence from
KHRC. In the end, the KHRC was compelled to commence legal action against the
NGO Coordination Board. The High Court found that the failure by the NGO
Coordination Board to give KHRC a hearing before arriving at a decision to
cancel its registration was a violation of its constitutional rights and that
this failure was compounded when the NGO board failed to furnish written
reasons to KHRC.
The
Observatory expresses its concern over the above-mentioned facts and urges
authorities in Kenya to ensure that KHRC and its staff members can carry out
their legitimate and peaceful human rights activities without any hindrance.
Furthermore
on January 6, 2017 the Interior Principal Secretary Karanja Kibicho wrote to
all the 47 county commissioners directing them to shut down NGOs that are not
properly licensed or are implementing projects that they have not been
registered to undertake. The directive also requires all foreign employees
working for NGOs in the country to produce on demand a valid work permit issued
by the Directorate of Immigration Services. They must also have a
recommendation letter from the NGO Coordination Board.
The
Observatory would like to recall that this happens under the same
administration that has been undermining, for four years since its signing into
law on January 14, 2013, the commencement of the Public Benefit Organisation
(PBO) Act 2013, a law seeking to provide an enabling environment for NGOs.
Despite the High Court ruling for its immediate overdue commencement on October
31, 2016, no further step has been undertaken so far[3].
Instead, as of today the NGO Coordination Act 1990 is still regulating the
space for civil society with broad and vague provisions leaving room for
arbitrariness and abuses against NGOs[4].


The Observatory considers extremely worrisome this lack of political will to
create a favourable environment for civil society to work without hindrances in
the defence of human rights and strongly condemns this new attack against the
Kenyan civil society. 

Finally, the Observatory would like to reiterate the importance of guaranteeing
the constitutional rights to freedom of association, assembly and expression,
particularly in view of the upcoming general elections, in order to prevent the
brutal experiences of excessive use of violence by the police that Kenya has
faced around the past two general elections[5].
Actions requested:
Please write to the authorities of Kenya urging them
to: 
i.   
Put an end to all forms of
harassment and smearing campaigns against human rights defenders in Kenya as
they only aim at sanctioning their legitimate human rights activities;
ii.  
Guarantee under all circumstances
the physical and psychological integrity of all human rights defenders in the
country:
iii. Follow
the order of the High Court of Kenya by effectively implementing the PBO Act
without further delay;
iv. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9,
1998, in particular its Articles 1 and 12.2; and
v.    
Ensure in all
circumstances, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with international human rights standards and international instruments
ratified by Kenya.
Addresses:

·      
Hon. Uhuru Kenyatta,
President of the Republic of Kenya, Fax: +254-020-2436, Email:
president@statehousekenya.go.ke 
·      
Hon. William Ruto,
Deputy-President of the Republic of Kenya Email: dp@deputypresident.go.ke 
·      
Hon. Joseph Nkaissery,
Interior & Coordination Ministry Email: ps.interior@kenya.go.ke 
·      
Mr. Joseph Boinnet,
Inspector General of Police, Email: nps@nationalpolice.go.ke
·      
Macharia Njeru,
Chairperson, Independent Policing Oversight Authority, Email: macharia.njeru@ipoa.go.ke
·      
Otiende Amollo,
Chairperson, Commission on Administrative Justice,
Email:otiendeamollo@yahoo.com; otiendeamollo@ombudsman.go.ke
·      
Commissioner Kagwiria
Mbogori, Chairperson, Kenya National Commission on Human Rights (KNCHR), Fax:
+254-020- 2716160 E-mail haki@knchr.org
·      
H.E. Mr. Stephen Ndungu
Karau, Permanent Mission of Kenya to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland,
Fax: +41 22 731 29 05, E-mail: mission.kenya@ties.itu.int
·      
H.E. Johnson Weru,
Embassy of Kenya in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 340 10 50 / + 32 2 340 10
68. Email: kenbrussels@hotmail.com 
Please also write to the diplomatic representations of
Kenya in your respective countries. 
***
Paris-Geneva,
January 13, 2017
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The objective of this programme is to prevent
or remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and
OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights
Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society. 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·      
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax FIDH: + 33
(0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
·      
Tel and fax OMCT: + 41
(0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1]                
PWC is KHRC current auditor and PKF is KHRC previous auditor. The NGO
Coordination Board is accusing both firms of helping KHRC in covering financial
mismanagement.


[2]                
It is the not the first time that the NGO Coordinational Board
arbitrarily put hindrances to the freedom of association of NGOs in Kenya. See
the Observatory Urgent Appeal KEN 004 / 1216 / OBS 110 issued on December 20,
2016.


[3]                
See the Observatory Press Release issued on November 4, 2016.


[4]                
For example, the NGO Coordination Board can refuse registration of an
NGO applicant if its proposed activities or procedures are not “in the national
interest”, and is not legally required to furnish the applicant with an
explanation for the refusal of registration. Moreover, wide discretion is given
to the NGO Board and the Minister, including regarding the certificate of
registration, and the timeframe within which the NGO Coordination Board must
act on NGO registration applications.


[5]                 See
the Observatory end-of-mission Press Release issued on October 28, 2016. 