Azerbaijan:  Joint statement Sport For Rights: Another human rights lawyer at risk of disbarment in Azerbaijan
March  1, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2016 / MarchAzerbaijan: Joint statement Sport For Rights: Another human rights lawyer at risk of disbarment in Azerbaijan Azerbaijan_2016.03.01_SFR_Statement3 pages / 115 KB​​​Sport
 for Rights' campaign, of which OMCT is member, has been established to 
raise the problem of political prisoners in the context of the 
forthcoming international sporting events to be hosted by Azerbaijan.  
The Norwegian Helsinki Committee and the other undersigned members of 
the Sport for Rights coalition express serious concern regarding the 
on-going disciplinary case against Yalchin Imanov, a prominent 
human rights lawyer in Azerbaijan. Any disciplinary
sanctions against the lawyer could severely undermine his independence 
as member of the legal profession and hinder his important and 
legitimate professional activity.

“The recent judicial harassment against Imanov and many other 
independent lawyers in Azerbaijan contravenes obligations Azerbaijan 
has undertaken before the international community,” Secretary General 
Bjørn Engesland of the Norwegian Helsinki Committee said.
International human rights law pays particular attention to the 
independence of lawyers and imposes upon the authorities the obligation 
to ensure that lawyers are able to perform their professional functions 
without intimidation, hindrance, or harassment.

The Case of Yalchin Imanov
 
Yalchin Imanov, 43, is a practicing lawyer and has been a member of the 
Collegium of Advocates since 2007. Imanov represents the interests of 
many well-known political prisoners in Azerbaijani jails. His clients 
include imprisoned journalist Khadija Ismayilova,
political opposition figures Mammad Ibrahim, Fuad Gahramanli, and Murad
Adilov, journalist Nijat Aliyev, and many other wrongfully 
arrested dissidents and victims of human rights violations in 
Azerbaijan.

The case against lawyer Imanov was reportedly based on a complaint 
issued by a judge of the Baku Narimanov District Court during the 
trial of an opposition activist. On 12 February, the judge filed 
a complaint with the Collegium of Advocates requesting the
body to take appropriate disciplinary action against Imanov for his 
“unethical behaviour” against the Court. According to Imanov, in the 
complaint the judge said that Imanov’s statements about the “judge’s 
negligent approach to the motions” and “non-objective
consideration of motions” were intended to express impoliteness against
the court and that the lawyer did not show due respect in the 
trial process.
 
Following the judge’s complaint, the disciplinary committee of the 
Collegium of Advocates is expected to launch a review of 
Imanov’s conduct. At this writing, the committee has not set a date for 
the review. The lawyer has not been informed whether the judge’s letter
of complaint has been received by the Collegium of Advocates.
 
The lawyer was not provided with an official copy of the judge’s 
allegations against him. Imanov told the Norwegian Helsinki Committee 
that he had simply exercised his right to voice his opinion about the 
trial process, and had not shown any disrespect or alleged
inappropriate conduct in court, although Article 20 of the UN 
Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers states that lawyers shall enjoy 
immunity for relevant statements made in good faith in the professional 
appearance before a court. Imanov characterised the
complaint against him as part of a broader campaign of pressure against
lawyers that take on politically sensitive cases and clients considered
by the authorities to be subversive.

The situation for human rights lawyers in Azerbaijan

The past two years have seen a drastic increase in the amount of 
pressure exerted on Azerbaijan's small cadre of independent human 
rights lawyers. Lawyers who take on politically sensitive cases with 
a human rights perspective challenging the authorities risk
paying a high price. For example, Intigam Aliyev, a leading human 
rights lawyer, has been jailed since 8 August 2014. On 24 February 2016,
the Azerbaijan Supreme Court rejected Aliyev’s appeal, leaving him to 
serve the remainder of his 7.5-year sentence.
 
Furthermore, lawyers in Azerbaijan have also been subject to arbitrary 
travel bans, which as a result prevents them from representing 
their clients at the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR), receiving 
further education and training abroad, or participating
in the events of international organisations. Lawyer 
Asabali Mustafayev, who is a member of the Collegium of Advocates, 
remains under a travel ban, and investigations into his organisation are
on-going. 

Today, there is only a very small group of lawyers in Azerbaijan who 
remain willing to take the risk of representing cases related to 
civil society or of political activists. With the on-going crackdown, 
this handful of courageous lawyers cannot perform their
professional duties without fear of retribution, and are increasingly 
rendered unable to practice law.  Other lawyers hesitate to take on 
"political cases" out of fear of being disbarred by the Collegium of 
Advocates and subsequently having their licenses
revoked or suspended or even facing criminal sanctions.
 
“Such judicial harassment highlights serious concerns regarding the 
independence of the Collegium of Advocates, as well as its ability 
to protect the interests of the legal profession in the 
country”, Brigitte Dufour, Director of the International Partnership
for Human Rights (IPHR) said. Over the past few years, the Collegium of
Advocates, under the strict control of the Ministry of Justice, has 
disbarred a number of lawyers[1] who have represented critics of the 
government.

The repression against lawyers leaves the most vulnerable clients even 
more liable to persecution and effectively undermines their 
defence. These lawyers are also instrumental in facilitating 
the submission of Azerbaijani citizens' cases to the ECtHR. These
cases have cast the international spotlight on Azerbaijan's manifold 
human rights violations. The numbers of independent lawyers are 
alarmingly decreasing, thus denying the wrongfully imprisoned activists 
their right to legal defence, as recently reported
in a review of threats against and practices on human rights 
lawyers.[2]

Many lawyers who represented the leading civil society actors arrested 
since summer 2014 have faced harassment and unjustified punishment. The 
undersigning organisations therefore strongly believe that the on-going 
disciplinary case against Imanov is one more politically
motivated case against a lawyer and is connected to the sensitive 
nature of his clients’ cases.
Imanov and Azerbaijan’s other remaining independent lawyers should be 
able to practice law without fear of retribution, as required 
by international human rights law.

The undersigned members of the Sport for Rights coalition call 
on the disciplinary committee of the Collegium of Advocates to review 
this groundless case and dismiss the complaint brought against Imanov, 
ensuring that he is able to perform his professional
duties without further intimidation, hindrance, or harassment.
 
The Norwegian Helsinki Committee and the other undersigned NGOs further 
call on the authorities of Azerbaijan to put an end to the repression 
targeting human rights lawyers. They should immediately cease such 
persecution and all forms of harassment of lawyers
who are providing assistance to human rights defenders, journalists, 
and activists.
 
Supporting organisations:
 
Canadian Journalists for Free Expression
Civil Rights Defenders
Human Rights House Foundation
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), within the framework 
of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
International Partnership for Human Rights
Norwegian Helsinki Committee
Pen American Center
Polish Green Network
World Organization Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders

[1] The list of disbarred lawyers in Azerbaijan from 2013 to present: 
Khalid Baghirov, Alayif Hasanov, and Aslan Ismayilov. Before 
2012: Elchin Namazov, Namizad Safarov, Gurban Mammadov, Latifa Aliyeva, 
Hidayat Suleymanov, and Hazi Mammadov. Prior to that,
lawyers Annaghi Hajibayli and Intigam Aliyev were refused membership of
the Bar Association.

[2] Human Rights House Network, “Human Rights Lawyers at Risk”, 10 September 2015, page 20, available at http://humanrightshouse.org/Articles/21175.html 