Syrian Arab Republic:  Acts of harassment, arbitrary detention and torture against several human rights lawyers
December  7, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2011 / DecemberSyrian Arab Republic: Acts of harassment, arbitrary detention and torture against several human rights lawyersARABIC_Acts of harassment, arbitrary detention and torture against several human rights lawyers3 pages / 100 KB
URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
 
SYR 016 / 1211 / OBS 135
Incommunicado detention / Ill-treatments /
Fear for psychological and physical integrity /
Arrest attempt
Syria
December 7, 2011
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the 
following situation in Syria.
 
Description of the situation :
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about acts of 
harassment, arbitrary detention and torture against several human rights lawyers 
in Syria.
 
According to the information received, as of December 6, 2011, Mr. Abdul Salam Al-Atrash remained detained in an unknown 
location without charge and no information was given by the authorities on his 
status and condition. Mr. Abdul Salam Al-Atrash was arrested without a warrant 
by military security officers on September 12, 2011 at his place of residence in 
Aleppo (Hamdania). No charges were reportedly brought against him. Mr. Al-Atrash 
was last seen at the branch of military security in Damascus, where he was 
severely tortured, in critical health and suffering from a mental 
breakdown.
 
In addition, Mr. Hussam Al-Assaad, member of the Idleb branch 
of the Bar Association, was arrested in late November, and was subjected to 
harsh torture at the Military Intelligence Branch in Aleppo. Several parts of 
his body were allegedly skinned off. Mr. Hussam Al-Assaad would require urgent 
medical care. At the time of publication of this appeal, Mr. Abdul Salam 
Al-Atrash was still detained in an unknown location without charge and no 
information was given by the authorities on his status and condition. 

 
Security forces and semi-security forces raided the home of Mr. 
Ali Badran in Tel Rfat, as well as the houses of Messrs. Youssef 
Horan and Mohamed Haji Abdullah in Aleppo, who escaped arrest 
attempts, respectively on November 8, December 2 and November 30, 2011. There 
names were reportedly sent to all the branches of the intelligence services. To 
date, the three remain in hiding to escape arbitrary arrest and 
tortutre.
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the acts mentioned above which 
target human rights lawyers, and urges the authorities to immediately and 
unconditionally release those detained, allow them immediate access to medical 
care, and more generally put an end to any kind of harassment against them, as 
this seems to only aim at sanctioning their human rights activities.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the Syrian authorities urging them to: 
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological 
integrity of Messrs Abdul Salam Al-Atrash, Hussam Al-Assaad, Ali Badran, Youssef 
Horan and Mohamed Haji Abdullah, and more generally all human rights defenders 
in Syria;
 
ii. Disclose the whereabouts of, and release immediately and 
unconditionally Messrs. Abdul Salam Al-Atrash and Hussam Al-Assaad, as their 
arrest seems to merely aim at sanctioning their human rights 
activities;
 
iii. Put an end to any kind of harassment - including at the judicial 
level - against Messrs. Abdul Salam Al-Atrash, Hussam Al-Assad, Ali Badran, 
Joseph Horan and Mohamed Haji Abdullah, and more generally all human rights 
defenders in Syria;
 
iv. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 
1998, especially: 
- its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the 
protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the 
national and international levels”, 
- its Article 6 (b) and (c), which states that “Everyone has the 
right, individually and in association with others […] as provided for in human 
rights and other applicable international instruments, freely to publish, impart 
or disseminate to others views, information and knowledge on all human rights 
and fundamental freedoms and [...] to study, discuss, form and hold opinions on 
the observance, both in law and in practice, of all human rights and fundamental 
freedoms and, through these and other appropriate means, to draw public 
attention to those matters”.
- and its Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all 
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of 
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, 
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or 
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of 
the rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 
v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental 
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and 
international instruments ratified by the Syrian Arab Republic.
 
Addresses :
 
· President, His Excellency Bashar al-Assad, Presidential Palace, al 
Rashid Street, Damascus, Syria Arab Republic, Fax: +963 11 332 
3410;
· Minister of Defence, His Excellency General, Ali Habib Mahmud, 
Ministry of Defence, O mayyad Square, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, Fax: +963 
11 223 7842;
· Minister of Justice, His Excellency Mr. Ahmad Hamod Younes, Mazeh 
“Otstrad”, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, Fax: +963 11 666 
2460
· Minister of Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Wallid Mu’allim, 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, al-Rashid Street, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, 
Fax: +963 11 332 7620;
· Ambassador Faysal Khabbaz Hamoui, Permanent Mission of the Syrian 
Arab Republic to UN in Geneva, 72 rue de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, 
Fax: +41 22 738 42 75, Email: mission.syria@ties.itu.in;
· Embassy the Syrian Arab Republic in Brussels, 1 avenue F.D. 
Roosevelt, 1050 Brussels, Belgium, Tel: +32 2 554 19 22; Fax: +32 2 648 14 85. 

 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the Syrian 
Arabic Republic in your respective country. 
 
*** 
Paris-Geneva, December 7, 2011
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this 
appeal in your reply.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 

Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 
29 