Bangladesh:  Continuing acts of harassment against members of Odhikar
March 22, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2011 / MarchBangladesh: Continuing acts of harassment against members of OdhikarHarassment against members of Odhikar4 pages / 111 KB

URGENT APPEAL - THE 
OBSERVATORY
 
BGD 001 / 0311 / OBS 039
Harassment 
/ Surveillance
Bangladesh
March 
22, 2011 
The 
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of 
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation 
Against Torture (OMCT) requests 
your urgent intervention 
in the following situation in Bangladesh.
Description 
of the situation:
The 
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about continuing acts of 
harassment against the members of Odhikar, 
a human rights organisation composed of lawyers, university professors, 
journalists, social and development 
activists committed to human rights.
According 
to the information received, numerous 
acts of harassment have been recently taking place against several members of 
Odhikar, particularly in the aftermath of Odhikar's 3rd "Annual Human Rights 
Defenders Conference" organised on March 12 and 13, 2011 in 
Dhaka.
Since 
March 14, 2011, members of the National Security Intelligence (NSI) reportedly 
resumed their activities of close monitoring on Odhikar and its members, in 
particular Mr. Adilur 
Rahman Khan 
its Secretary and member of OMCT General Assembly. On March 14, 2011, at about 
4.30 p.m., one person came to the main (outside) gate of the Odhikar office in 
Dhaka and asked questions to one of the employees about Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan's 
family situation, such as how many children he has.
On 
March 15, 2011, while Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan was returning from the Supreme 
Court where he appears as an advocate, at about 12.30 p.m., two persons on a 
motorcycle bearing the license number Dhaka Metro A-07-5535 followed him to his 
home, located on the ground floor of the building where Odhikar premises are. 

On 
the afternoon of that day, when one of employees – who is also a relative of Mr. 
Adilur Rahman Khan – walked out of the gate at about 5 p.m. to get some tea from 
the tea stall, four persons surrounded him and requested information about Mr. 
Adilur Rahman Khan's schedule. Two of these men had reportedly established 
themselves opposite the premises all day long, therefore having full view on 
Odhikar’s main gate. 
On 
March 17 at about 7.30 p.m., two persons blocked the road of the same employee, 
and asked him about the whereabouts of Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan. The employee told 
the men not to bother him with questions he could not answer, and walked into a 
nearby house until the men left.
In 
addition, on March 16, 2011 at about 12.30 p.m., an individual introducing 
himself as Mr. Mohammad Tota Miah, Deputy Assistant Director of the NSI, came to 
Odhikar’s office and asked the accountant to hand him over all the documents 
which Odhikar had already submitted to the NGO Affairs Bureau. When the 
accountant requested to see his identity card or a mandate from the competent 
authority demanding the supply of such documents, the latter left the office. 

Background 
information:
Previously, 
on October 5, 6, 7, 9, 17, 23, November 3, and December 25 and 26, 2010, 8 
members of Bangladeshi law enforcement – Special Branch of Police and NSI – had 
visited Odhikar offices and identified themselves as members of the police from 
the “Special Branch”. During the visits, members of the law enforcement agencies 
had inquired about Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan, and had requested his curriculum 
vitae, his passport details and his political background.
On 
October 17, 2010 in particular, the Deputy Assistant Director of the Munshiganj 
branch 
of the NSI, Mr. Abdul Mukit, had called Odhikar 
Director Nasiruddin 
Elan 
on his 
cell 
phone, seeking 
information about Odhikar projects. 
On October 19, 2010 Mr. Nasiruddin Elan had faxed 
all the relevant information to Mr. Abdul Mukit, who 
called 
him 
the next 
day, 
asking 
him 
to come to the Munshiganj NSI office. Meanwhile, 
NSI field 
officers 
were 
also 
questioning 
members 
of Odhikar 
at the local level in Munshiganj about the work 
of the organisation. 
On 
October 23, 2010 Mr. Nasiruddin Elan had 
been 
to the Munshiganj NSI office to meet 
with Mr. Abdul Mukit. The Deputy Assistant Director of the NSI had asked 
many 
questions to the Odhikar Director, in particular his 
political 
background and other 
affiliations. Mr. Abdul Mukit had told 
Mr. Nasiruddin Elan that 
this 
investigation was 
being 
carried 
out by order 
of the ‘higher 
officials’, 
without providing further information.
The 
Observatory was also informed of the silence of the Bangladeshi administration 
following the submission of various human rights projects by 
Odhikar.
Indeed, 
although Odhikar sent a letter to the NGO Affairs Bureau on July 7, 2010 
demanding approval of project titled ‘Promotion of Human Rights in Bangladesh 
through Documentation, Fact-finding and Advocacy’ (funded by the Finnish NGO 
Foundation for Human Rights – KIOS), and another on December 28, 2010 for the 
project titled ‘Education on the Convention against Torture and OPCAT 
Awareness Programme in Bangladesh’ (funded by the European Union), both 
projects are reportedly still pending with the Bureau for its approval and 
clearance, although Odhikar has already clarified a number of 
queries.
The 
Observatory highlights in that regard that according to its Rules of Business, 
the NGO Affairs Bureau has to issue a decision on a proposed project within 45 
days after the reception of all relevant information, and that after it has 
examined the project proposal, the Bureau needs to send it to the relevant 
Ministry which has 21 days to provide its comments regarding the project. The 
Rules of Business further state that if the Ministry fails to send its comment 
within the specified period, it is considered that the Ministry has no objection 
regarding the project[1].
Previously, 
through a letter dated February 11, 2010, the NGO Affairs Bureau had refused to 
grant extension of one of Odhikar projects[2].
The 
Observatory expresses 
its deepest concern aboutthe 
ongoing acts of harassment against Odhikar and its members, which 
seem to merely aim at hindering their human rights 
activities.
Actions 
requested:
Please 
write to the Bangladeshi authorities urging them to: 
i. 
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of 
Mr. 
Adilur Rahman Khan, Mr. Nasiruddin Elan, and all staff 
members 
of Odhikar 
as well as all human rights defenders in Bangladesh;
iii. 
Conform in all circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human 
Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General 
Assembly, in particular:
 
-          its 
Article 5 which provides that “for the purpose of promoting and protecting human 
rights and fundamental freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in 
association with others, at the national and international levels: (a) 
to 
meet or assemble peacefully; (b) 
To form, join and participate in non-governmental organizations, associations or 
groups; (c) 
To communicate with non-governmental or intergovernmental 
organizations”;
-          
its 
Article 6.a which states that “everyone 
has the right, individually and in association with others, to know, seek, 
obtain, receive and hold information about all human rights and fundamental 
freedoms”;
-          and 
its Article 12.2 which provides that “the State shall take all necessary 
measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, 
individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats, 
retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other 
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the 
rights referred to in the present Declaration.”
iv. 
Guarantee 
the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the 
Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other international human rights 
instruments ratified by Bangladesh.
Addresses:
· 
Ms. Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, Gona Bhaban, 
Old Sangsad Bhaban, Tejgaon, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Fax: +880 2 811 
3243, Email: info@pmo.gov.bd 
; pm@pmo.gov.bd
· 
Ms. Sahara Khatun, Minister for Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, 
Bangladesh Secretariat Building 4, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Fax: 
+880 2 716 9667 or +880 2 717 1611.Email: 
minister@mha.gov.bd
· 
Barrister Shafique Ahmed, Minister for Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, 
Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat, 
Dhaka, Bangladesh, Email: info@minlaw.gov.bd
· 
Prof. Mizanur Rahman, Chairman, National Human Rights Commission, Dhaka, 
Bangladesh. E-mail: 
nhrc.bd@gmail.com
· 
Mr. Hasan Mahmud Khandoker, Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, 
Phoenix Road, Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh, Fax: 
+880 
2 712 5840. 
Email : 
ig@police.gov.bd
· 
Ambassador Mr. Md. Abdul Hannan, Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of 
Bangladesh to the United Nations in Geneva, 65 rue de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva, 
Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 46 16, E-mail: mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.int
· 
Embassy of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh in Brussels, 29-31 rue Jacques 
Jordaens, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 646 59 98; Email: info@bangladeshembassy.be
Please 
also write to the diplomatic representations of Bangladesh in your respective 
countries.
***
Paris-Geneva, 
March 22, 2011
Kindly 
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your 
reply.
The 
Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human 
Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of 
need.
To 
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
· 
Email: Appeals@fidh-omct.org

· 
Tel and fax OMCT: + 41 22 809 49 39 / 41 22 809 49 29
·
Tel and fax FIDH: +33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / 01 43 55 18 
80




[1]              See Section 7(Gha) and 7(Chha) of 
the Rules of Business of the NGO Affairs Bureau, dated May 29, 
2001.

[2]               See Open letter of the Observatory dated 
February 18, 2010. 