Syrian Arab Republic:  Syria : More than one week after his arrest, the whereabouts of the President of the CDF are still unknown.
April 21, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2004 / AprilSyrian Arab Republic: Syria : More than one week after his arrest, the whereabouts of the President of the CDF are still unknown.PRESS RELEASE  Syria : More than one week after his arrest, the whereabouts  of the President of the CDF are still unknown  Paris – Geneva, April 21, 2004 - The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint program of FIDH and OMCT, expresses its deep concern about the situation of Mr. Akhtam Naisse, president of the Committees for the Defence of Democratic Freedoms and Human Rights in Syria (CDF), whose whereabouts remain unknown since his arrest on 13 April 2004, in Latakia, Syria (See Urgent appeal of the Observatory, 15 April, 2004, SYR 002/1504/OBS 026).  The Observatory recalls that Mr. Naisse was arrested following the publication of CDF’s annual report, which denounces flagrant violations of human rights in Syria, and the recent declarations made by CDF representatives denouncing violations against the Kurdish population in the North of the country in March 2004. The arrest also follows a gathering organized by CDF on March 8, 2004, in which 400 participants requested the cancellation of the State of Emergency, the release of political prisoners and the establishment of democratic reforms. This sit-in was dispersed by the security forces and several activists were detained and intimidated in the weeks following the event.  The Observatory recalls that Mr. Naisse has been subjected to continuous acts of harassment for the past several years because of his activities in favour of human rights in Syria, (see last annual reports of the Observatory).  The Observatory is particularly concerned about Mr. Naisse’s health. He is diabetic and needs a strict and daily medical treatment.   The Observatory urges the Syrian authorities to: i.	guarantee Mr. Akhtam Naisse's physical and psychological integrity, and grant him access to necessary medical care; ii.	inform of Mr. Naisse's whereabouts, and proceed to his immediate and unconditional release; iii.	put an end to any kind of harassment against human rights defenders and conform with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 9 December 1998; iv.	conform with the provisions of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other international human rights instruments ratified by Syria.  Press Contact :  - FIDH : Driss El Yazami, secrétaire général de la FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18. - OMCT : + 41 22 809 49 39. 