Azerbaijan:  Press Release: Intigam Aliyev's sentence upheld following a summary trial
July 23, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Azerbaijan / 2015 / JulyAzerbaijan: Press Release: Intigam Aliyev's sentence upheld following a summary trialAzerbaijan_2015.07.23_PR_EN2 pages / 138 KB
Paris-Geneva,
July 23, 2015 – On July 21, 2015, the Baku Court
of Appeal upheld the 7.5 year imprisonment sentence against Mr. Intigam Aliyev
following summary proceedings which failed to meet international fair trial
standards. Mr. Intigam Aliyev is the first to be sentenced in appeal for his
human rights work among many human rights defenders arrested during the 2014
crackdown targeting civil society in Azerbaijan. The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders condemns the conviction on trumped-up
charges of the prominent human rights lawyer and calls for a strong reaction by
the international community.

On July 21,
2015, the Baku Appeal Court dismissed an appeal filed on behalf of human rights
defender Mr. Intigam Aliyev and upheld a 7.5 year imprisonment sentence.
Head of the Legal Education Society and human rights lawyer, Mr. Aliyev has
represented over 100 victims before the European Court of Human Rights. Charged
with “tax evasion, “abuse of authority”, “illegal entrepreneurship”, and
“appropriation”, he was sentenced by the Baku Grave Crimes Court on April 22,
2015.
During the
July 21st hearing all petitions filed by the defence were denied. Mr. Aliyev
was not allowed to sit next to his lawyer and was placed
in a glass cage in which he could barely hear the proceedings. Furthermore,
the presiding judge repeatedly turned off the microphone when Mr. Aliyev
challenged the fairness of the judicial proceedings.
“Less than a month after the closure
of the European Games, Azeri authorities just waited for the departure of the
international community to resume their crackdown on human rights defenders.
This confirms the calls from civil society organisations to avoid that the Baku
Games remain business as usual in this repressive context”,
said FIDH President Karim Lahidji.
Since
the beginning of his detention on August 8, 2014, Mr. Aliyev’s health has
severely deteriorated. He suffers from violent headaches, loss of appetite and
insomnia. A medical exam ran at the end of October, revealed that he was
suffering from medical disorders – which require hospitalisation.
“This sham appeal trial is the first
of what is probably going to be a long series of summary appeals to secure the
detention of all dissident voices and human rights defenders in Azerbaijan.
With some limited exceptions, the reaction of the international community to
this wave of repression has been very mild and it is about time for a strong
response”, concluded OMCT Secretary General Gerald
Staberock.
On the same
day, a 10-minutes long preliminary hearing in Rasul Jafarov's appeal trial was
held before the Baku Court of Appeal. Mr. Jafarov
was condemned by a lower court to six and a half years of jail on trumped-up
charges. Several civil society representatives, journalists and diplomats were
denied access to the courtroom in violation of the principle of the publicity
of hearings. Next hearing was scheduled on July 31, 2015.
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in
1997 by FIDH
and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT).
The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations
of repression against human rights defenders.
For more
information, please contact :
FIDH : Lucie Kroening (French /
English / German / Arabic) - Tel: +33 6 48 05 91 57 (Paris) / Arthur Manet
(French / English / Spanish) - Tel: +33 6 72 28 42 94 (Paris)OMCT : Miguel Martín
Zumalacárregui (French / English / Spanish) - Tel: +41 22 809 49 24
(Geneva/Brussels) 