China:  Whereabouts of Mr. Tsultrim Gyaltsen and Mr. Yugyal unknown_Fear for their safety
October 16, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / China / 2013 / OctoberChina: Whereabouts of Mr. Tsultrim Gyaltsen and Mr. Yugyal unknown_Fear for their safety
CHN 161013
Arbitrary Detention/ Whereabouts
unknown/ Fear for the safety
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the People’s Republic of China. 
Brief description of the situation
TheInternational
Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by The Tibetan Centre for Human Rights
and Democracy (TCHRD), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the arbitrary
detention of two Tibetans, a popular writer and a former policeman, Mr. Tsultrim Gyaltsen, 27 years old, and
Mr. Yugyal, 26 years old, both
living in Tengkhar Village in Shamchu Township, Diru County, Tibetan Autonomous
Prefecture. OMCT fears for their safety since their fate and exact whereabouts
remained unclear at the time of writing this urgent appeal. 
According to the information received, on 11 October
2013 at about 1:00 am, Mr. Tsultrim Gyaltsen was arrested by a group of County
Public Security Bureau (PSB) officers during a night raid at his home in
Tengkhar. The PSB officers searched his entire place and confiscated his mobile
phone, computer, books and other documents. He was reportedly detained on
accusations of “engaging in separatist activities and disrupting social
stability by spreading rumours”. 
Mr. Tsultrim Gyaltsen, better known for his pseudonym
“Shogdril”, is a popular and controversial writer, due to the political content
of some of his writings and books. Mr. Tsultrim Gyaltsen was reportedly detained
in relation to an event in Diry County, where he spoke against the Chinese government’s
policies. 
According to the same information received, on 12
October 2013 Mr. Yugal, a friend of Mr. Tsultrim Gyaltsen and a former PSB
officer, was also arrested from his house on the same accusations than Mr. Tsultrim
Gyaltsen. 
At the time of writing this appeal, no information was
available about the fate and exact whereabouts of Mr. Tultrim Gyaltsen and Mr.
Yugyan. Furthermore, the exact charges held against them were also unknown.
The arrest and detention of Mr. Tultrim Gyaltsen and
Mr. Yugyan occurred in the framework of a crackdown in Diru County. Since July
2013, Chinese authorities have been implementing various “patriotic” campaigns,
which also include forcing Tibetans to fly the five-starred Chinese flags on
their rooftops. 
The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely
concerned about the safety of Mr. Tsultrim Gyaltsen and Mr. Yugyan.OMCT urges the competent authorities to guarantee their
physical and psychological integrity at all times, in accordance with
international human rights law, in particular the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and to immediately locate and disclose
their whereabouts.
OMCT further urges for their
immediate release since their arrests appear to be solely based on the peaceful
exercise of their right to freedom of expression. 
Actions Requested 
Please write to the
authorities in the People’s Republic of China urging them to:
i.              
Immediately
locate and disclose the whereabouts of Mr. Tsultrim Gyaltsen and Mr. Yugyan
ii.             
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, their physical and psychological integrity;  
iii.           
Grant
them access to a lawyer of their choice and their families, as well as
guarantee that they are examined by independent doctors and receive adequate
medical care if necessary; 
iv.           
Order their immediate release in the absence of valid
legal charges that are
consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist,
bring them before an impartial, independent and competent tribunal and
guarantee their procedural rights at all times;
v.             
Carry out a prompt, effective,
thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the aforementioned facts in accordance with international
human rights standards, the result of which must be made public,in order to bring those responsible
before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil
and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;
vi.           
Guarantee
the
respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
·      
Mr. Li Keqiang Guojiazhongli, Prime Minister of the
People’s Republic of China, Guojia Zongli, The State Council General Office, 2
Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10
65961109 (c/o Ministry of Foreign Affairs) Email: notice@scio.gov.cn
·      
Minister of Justice of the People’s Republic of
China, 10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People’s
Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6529 2345, Emails: minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cn
·      
Ambassador Liu Zhenmin, Permanent Mission of the
People’s Republic of China, Chemin de Surville 11, P.O. Box 85, 1213
Petit-Lancy 2, Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7937014, E-mail: chinamission_gva@mfa.gov.cn
Please also write to the embassies of the People’s Republic of China in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 16 October 2013
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 