Greece:  Greece: A History of Failed Promises to the Roma
February 18, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Urgent Interventions / Greece / 2004 / FebruaryGreece: Greece: A History of Failed Promises to the RomaPress Release  Geneva, February 18, 2004  The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) denounces the continued failure of  the Greek authorities to honour their commitment to the Roma settlement in Spata, most recently by failing to provide them with essential basic services. 22 Roma families were forcibly relocated by the authorities in October 2000  to what was described as a ‘model settlement’. The settlement is in fact located 5 kms away from the last house in Spata, has no electricity or running water facilities and there is no public transport to and from the settlement.  The Greek Helsinki Monitor, a member of the OMCT network, has drawn attention to the current situation of the Roma in the settlement, which was blocked by snow from Thursday, February 12 until mid-day Sunday, February 15. A 1.5 km long dirt road that connects the settlement to the main road was completely impassable and as a result, the settlement whose access to water is limited to water transported in plastic containers by tank-wagons was without water for the entire period. The community has not been equipped with heating or electricity for the last 3 years. Community representatives reported that when they called the Spata municipality to obtain help, they were told, “no one cares for you, you are abandoned just like dogs” and that they should address themselves to the former mayor who had settled them there. Despite the fact that the road was cleared on Sunday, February 15, the community was provided with water by the local authorities only at mid-day February 17, while the promised food was never sent.   This most recent failure of the Greek government to honour its commitments to the Roma community is part of a systemized failure to protect and provide for the Roma community. For example, in September 2003, OMCT sent an open letter to the Greek government expressing concern about the inability of children from the Spata Roma community to attend school because of the lack of public transportation. The distance from the Municipality made it impossible for the Roma children to reach school without transportation and the children living in the settlement could not attend school ever since the community was resettled. Following the public outcry, a bus was finally provided and the Roma children are attending a preparatory class to prepare them for integration into normal school classes in September 2004. No one in the administration has been held responsible or accountable for  the children’s loss of three years of mandatory schooling.  The situation of the Roma community in Spata reflects “the rule” rather than “the exception” when it comes to the Greek government’s policy towards the Roma. Over the past years, OMCT has frequently received information about attempted or actual forced evictions and forced resettlements of Roma communities by Greek authorities, particularly in connection with preparations for the 2004 Olympic Games, notably in Aghia Paraskevi, Ano Liosia, Aspropyrgos, Halandri and Marousi, just to list those in or around Athens.   OMCT notes that Greece will be examined by the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in April-May 2004 and urges the Greek government to honour their international obligations and ensure that the economic, social and cultural rights of the Roma are protected and realised.  For more information, please contact: Meghna Abraham or Lucinda O’Hanlon, The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) Ph: +41 22 8094939, E-mail: mab@omct.org, loh@omct.org 