Sudan:  Sudan - kidnapping and torture of student at Alahlia University
September  1, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2005 / SeptemberSudan: Sudan - kidnapping and torture of student at Alahlia UniversityCase SDN 010905 Kidnapping / Torture   The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information concerning the following situation in Sudan.  Brief description of the situationThe International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudan Organisation Against Torture (SOAT), a member of the OMCT network, that on 22 August 2005 at 11:00am, security officers and the National Congress Party Student Militia wing kidnapped Mr. Abu Alabass Mohamed Hassan, (22 yrs), a student at Alahlia University, Omdurman. Mr. Abu Alabass had been calling for the re-establishment of the University Student Union.   According to the information received, Mr. Abu Alabass was kidnapped at the front of Alahlia University and forced into a waiting car. Mr. Abu Alabass was taken to a house not far from the University where he was subjected to severe torture. The kidnappers’ inserted a bottle of mineral water into Mr. Abu Alabass’s anus, beat him all over his body and threatened him with rape. The kidnappers also shaved Mr. Abu Alabass’s head hair, his moustache and forced him to sign unknown documents. The kidnappers also demanded that Mr. Abu Alabass give up his student activities and join the National Congress Party.   Fourteen hours after his kidnapping, at 01.00am, (23 August) Mr. Abu Alabass was blindfolded, driven from the house and abandoned in a derelict area in Omdurman. After walking for approximately ten minutes, Mr. Abu Alabass found himself at Alsouq Alshabi, Omdurman.  Mr. Alabass reported to SOAT’s partner organization in Khartoum, Amel Centre for the Treatment and Rehabilitation of Victims of Torture on 23 August 2005 where he is currently receiving medical treatment for his injuries and legal aid.   Since July 2005, SOAT has documented the arbitrary arrests, detention and torture of over 22 students from Sudan University for Science and Technology and Alahlia University in Omdurman by security officers and the National Congress Party Student Militia wing. It is alleged that these students are being targeted and threatened to join the National Congress party or to refrain from any political activities.   The methods of torture reported by the students, particularly the sexual torture, sexual humiliation and threats of rape are identical to those utilised by the National Security Bureau and the Islamic students’ militia during the 1990s and the early part of 2000s.   Requested Action:Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:   i.	guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Alabass Mohamed Hassan; ii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into these events and in particular the alleged torture of Mr. Alabass Mohamed Hassan, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply to them the civil, penal and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; iii.	guarantee that adequate medical care is provided to Mr. Alabass Mohamed Hassan and that he be awarded reparation; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international humanitarian law and human rights standards. Addresses:His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, President' s Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 783223 Mr. Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affair, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 779383  Dr. Abdelmuneim Osman Mohamed Taha, Advisory Council for Human Rights, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 770883 His Excellency Ambassador Mr. Mohamed Al- Hassan Ahmed Al-Haj, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 335, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 731 26 56, +41 22 716 19 70, E-mail: mission.sudan@ties.itu.int.  Please also write to the embassies of Sudan in your respective country.  Geneva, 1st September 2005  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 