Kyrgyzstan:  Press Release: Pivotal moment for democracy in Kyrgyzstan: defenders facing increasing pressure -  Preliminary findings of a fact-finding mission on the conditions and vulnerabilities of human rights defenders and organisations
September 25, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Kyrgyzstan / 2015 / SeptemberKyrgyzstan: Press Release: Pivotal moment for democracy in Kyrgyzstan: defenders facing increasing pressure -  Preliminary findings of a fact-finding mission on the conditions and vulnerabilities of human rights defenders and organisationsBishkek, September 25, 2015 – Several laws, currently under discussion in
Kyrgyzstan's Parliament, could dramatically restrain Kyrgyz civil society
activities if adopted, the Observatory (FIDH-OMCT) warned today. The
Observatory also denounced the increase, over the past few years, of the
pressure against civil society: illegal
searches of NGO offices, surveillance and intimidation by intelligence
services, threat to (mis)use criminal provision on fighting extremism, smear
campaigns in the media, etc. These concerns were expressed during a
press conference in Bishkek, which followed a week-long investigative and
advocacy mission in the country. 
The Observatory delegation met with the Deputy Prime Minister, the First
Deputy Minister of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Deputy of the
Ombudsman of Kyrgyz Republic, the Ombudsman of Jalal-Abad , the Ombudsman of
Osh, the Deputy Prosecutor General of the Republic, the Head of the
Inter-Ethnic and Religious Affairs under the Presidency, as well as civil
society representatives in Bishkek, Osh and Jalal-Abad.
 
The delegation urged them to protect the space of human rights defenders
and to oppose the passing of several laws, notably one imposing the
stigmatising label of « foreign agents » for NGOs receiving foreign
funding and one criminalising ‘promotion’ of the equality of rights of LGBTI
persons.
 
“FIDH and OMCT fear that the passing of these laws will not only silence
human rights defenders but also put a fatal end to the construction of a
democratic system in Kyrgyzstan”, declared Karim Lahidji, FIDH president, who was heading the mission.

For many years, Kyrgyz civil society has been considered one of the strongest
in Central Asia. But, recently, while the country has joined the Eurasian
Customs Union, Russia has also traded bad practices with the introduction of
Russian like draft laws that endanger the freedoms of association, expression
and peaceful assembly. 
 
“Despite the fact that Kyrgyz authorities have been developing human
rights institutions in recent years, most of them, in keeping with Soviet
tradition, remain a facade and are not functioning effectively”, declared Tatiana Glushkova, lawyer with the Human Rights Centre
“Memorial”.

One day before the end of the mission, the authorities have failed to issue a permission
to visit Uzbek minority human rights defender Mr. Azimjan Askarov, sentenced to life in prison in 2010, following the
ethnic clashes in southern Kyrgyzstan. 
Watch the press conference (Bishkek, 25 September 2015)

“Azimjan Askarov is paying the highest price of a subtly increasing
repressive policy. The Kyrgyz human rights community remains dynamic but
suffers following the multiplication of acts of intimidation”, declared Alexandra Pomeon, FIDH Director of the
Observatory for Protection of Human Rights Defenders, who was also part of the
mission.
 
A mission report will be issued in the coming months
and will present detailed conclusions and recommendations to the Government of
Kyrgyzstan, non-State actors, the United Nations, the European Union and foreign embassies in
Kyrgyzstan.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders.


For more information, please
contact:
• FIDH: Arthur Manet / Audrey Couprie: + 33143552518
• OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: +41228094924 