Azerbaijan:  Leyla Yunus released on probation!
December 10, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2015 / DecemberAzerbaijan: Leyla Yunus released on probation!
 
Geneva-Paris,
December 10, 2015 - The Baku Court of Appeal commuted yesterday the sentence
against Ms. Leyla Yunus and Mr. Arif Yunusov to a release on probation for 5
years. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (a joint
OMCT-FIDH programme) welcomes this long-awaited decision which follows months
of intensive struggle for their freedom. 
Ms.
Leyla Yunus is the Director of the Institute for Peace and
Democracy (IPD) and a member of OMCT General Assembly. Her husband, Arif
Yunusov, heads the Conflictology Department of IPD. Both had been sentenced
to 8,5 and 7 years of imprisonment respectively on August 13, 2015, following a
procedure that grossly disregarded international standards of fair trial and
due process.
Ms.
Leyla Yunus was released yesterday after nearly 1,5 years of arbitrary
detention. Over the past months, the Courts had repeatedly refused the request
for conditional release on humanitarian grounds, which had been filed by the
lawyers of the Yunus couple in view of the severe deterioration of their
health. On November 13, the Baku Grave Crimes Court had approved the request to
change the measure of restraint against Mr. Arif Yunusov from detention to
conditional release for the period of appeal. Yesterday the Baku Court of
Appeal also commuted his sentence to a 5-year probation release. However, the
Observatory recalls that both Leyla and Arif are still facing charges of
treason in a separate judicial process.
The
Observatory welcomes the long overdue decision to release the Yunus but
strongly condemns the responsibility of the Azeri authorities in the
deterioration of the health condition of both Leyla and Arif Yunus during their
arbitrary detention. The Observatory also reiterates its position that the
conviction has no legal grounds and merely aims at sanctioning
their legitimate human rights activities.
The
Observatory now calls for all charges against the Yunus couple to be dropped,
as well as for the immediate and unconditional release of all other human
rights defenders arbitrarily detained in Azerbaijan, such as Khadija
Ismailova, Intigam Aliyev, Rasul Jafarov, Anar Mammadli,
Hilal Mammadov and Rauf Mirqadirov. 