Bangladesh:  Immediately release Mahmudur Rahman, arbitrarily imprisoned since 2013
February  3, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2016 / FebruaryBangladesh: Immediately release Mahmudur Rahman, arbitrarily imprisoned since 2013Geneva-Paris-Hong Kong, February 3, 2016. The authorities of
Bangladesh should immediately release journalist Mahmudur Rahman, who completed 1,000 days in
custody without trial on January 6, 2016 as part of the Government’s efforts to stifle
critical voices in the country, the Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (a OMCT-FIDH joint programme) and the Asian Human Rights
Commission (AHRC) said today.
 
Mr. Mahmudur Rahman,
Acting Editor of the Amar Desh
newspaper, has been detained since April 11, 2013, after he was charged with
sedition and unlawful publication of a Skype conversation between International
Crimes Tribunal (ICT) Judge Md Nizamul Huq and an external consultant in
December 2012. At the time of his arrest, the Amar Desh office and its
press were raided by the police, journalists and press-operators were beaten
and driven out, and the press building was sealed. It has remained closed
since. From April 11 to 24, 2013, Mr. Rahman was subjected to torture
while in police custody.

 
On August 13, 2015,
Mr. Mahmudur Rahman was sentenced to three years
in prison by a Dhaka Court for charges brought against him in 2010 by the Bangladesh’s
Anti-Corruption Commission (ACC), which accused him of failing to submit his
wealth statement.
 
Prior to his arrest in 2013, Mr. Rahman had already been the target
of judicial harassment in relation to defamation and sedition cases brought against
him by the Bangladeshi authorities, notably for publishing a report on alleged
corruption practices of the Prime Minister and her relatives. He was subjected
to torture and ill-treatment while he was arbitrarily detained in relation to
these charges from June 2010 to March 2011.
 
The Government has now mounted approximately 70 fabricated and politically
motivated cases against Mr. Rahman. He has to travel three to four times a week from
Kashimpur Jail 2 to the court of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Dhaka, for
hearings on these cases. Each journey, covering a total distance of almost 100
kilometres a day, takes more than four hours each way in a hot and humid prison
van with very little ventilation. This type of ill-treatment is especially
concerning due to 63 year-old Mahmudur Rahman's health, as he suffers from
various ailments aggravated by the torture he suffered while in police custody
and nearly four years of confinement at Kashimpur Jail 2. In addition, his
family members - including his wife and his mother - have also been threatened
and harassed by the Government.
 
Mr. Rahman’s current prolonged detention is illegal according to
both the Criminal Procedure Code and the Constitution of Bangladesh. The
Criminal Procedure Code clearly states that if a trial cannot be completed
within a specific time (in this case, 180 days) the accused person should be
released on bail. 
 
Our organisations reiterate
their call to the authorities of Bangladesh to immediately and unconditionally
release and to guarantee the physical and
psychological integrity of Mr. Mahmudur Rahman, whose
detention is emblematic of the increasing repression of dissenting voices in
the country.
 
Our organisations more generally urge the Bangladeshi Government to
uphold its obligation under international law to ensure that its people can
exercise and defend the right to freedom of expression as well as all other
human rights.
# # #
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders was created in
1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH.
The overall objective of this programme
is to strengthen the action of human
rights defenders in defence of victims and to reduce their
isolation and vulnerability. It is also based on the absolute necessity to
establish a systematic response to the repression they face.
The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) works towards the radical
rethinking and fundamental redesigning of justice institutions in order to
protect and promote human rights in Asia. Established in 1984, the Hong Kong
based organisation is a Laureate of the Right Livelihood Award, 2014. 