Cameroon:  Cameroon: arbitrary arrest and detention of around ten demonstrators
May  8, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Cameroon / 2001 / MayCameroon: Cameroon: arbitrary arrest and detention of around ten demonstratorsCase CMR 080501  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Cameroon.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by ACAT Cameroun and Agir Ensemble pour les Droits de l'Homme, both members of the OMCT network, of the arbitrary arrest and detention of around ten demonstrators in Cameroon.  According to the information received, the Cameroon police forces have allegedly arrested around 10 demonstrators in Duala's New Bell neighbourhood, including Thameni Djeukam, Léandre Djino, Peter William Mandio, Pokam Sindjou (Yaounde 1st University philosophy researcher) and Olivier Sande.  According to the reports, these persons were engaged in organising a rally, being held to mourn all the victims of the Operational Command (Commandement Opérationel) and, more generally, the victims of the current regime in Cameroon, which has been in place since April 6th 1984. The Operational Command was established in February 2000 to combat banditry, especially in Douala, but has since been accused of carrying out human rights abuses.   OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of all of the detainees, notably for Olivier Sande, who has already survived 40 days of incarceration and ill-treatment by the Operational Command in their detention facilities known as "Kosovo," and is a key witness of human rights abuses, including torture and extrajudicial executions, allegedly conducted by the Operational Command.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Cameroon urging them to:  1.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Thameni Djeukam, Léandre Djino, Peter William Mandio, Pokam Sindjou and Olivier Sande; 2.	order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; 3.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these arrests in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; 4.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.   Addresses  Monsieur le Président, Paul Biya. Palais de la Présidence. Fax +237 22 16 99       Please also write to the embassies of Cameroon in your respective country.  Geneva, May 8, 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 