OMCT AND GMEDIA CONCLUDED ITS SECOND WORKSHOP FOR JOURNALISTS ON “MEDIA EMPOWERMENT AGAINST TORTURE”
June 27, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / 2013 / JuneOMCT AND GMEDIA CONCLUDED ITS SECOND WORKSHOP FOR JOURNALISTS ON “MEDIA EMPOWERMENT AGAINST TORTURE”Geneva (Switzerland), 27 June 2013. The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and GMEDIA concluded its second workshop for journalists on “Media Empowerment Against Torture” that was held in Geneva from May 13th to May 17th, 2013. This joint five-days workshop, which was held in parallel of the 50th Session of the United Nations (UN) Committee Against Torture (CAT), had the main objective to provide selected journalists with a comprehensive overview on the prohibition of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (“ill-treatment”) and relevant international protection and promotion mechanisms, notably the CAT. Thirteen journalists, four from Guatemala and nine from Kenya, participated in the joint workshop and attended in parallel the CAT sessions on their respective countries. The journalists benefited from debates and discussions conducted by human rights experts from civil society, academia, media, UN agencies and permanent missions on various topics such as the absolute prohibition of torture and ill-treatment, UN human rights mechanisms, and the significant role that media can play in addressing the challenge of torture and impunity. Journalists also had the opportunity to share experiences and good practices among themselves and to better understand their role as human rights defenders when documenting human rights violations. The joint workshop has resulted in 37 published articles, video broadcasted and radio programs which are all available online[1]. More articles and reports are yet to be published, notably after the CAT adopted its concluding observations on Guatemala and Kenya at the end of the CAT session[2]. “…Thank you Gmedia and OMCT for the opportunity you gave me to attend the workshop held in Geneva on understanding issues related to human rights. This programme has enhanced my knowledge regarding legal mechanisms/conventions pertaining to torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment. I am now glad I can easily work on a story that is well researched and balanced…” wrote a participant from Kenya. This workshop was organised thanked to the support of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark and the German Federal Foreign Office. Its content is the sole responsibility of OMCT and Gmedia. For further information on the workshop, please contact:    • GMEDIA: Francesca Piccin, Tel. +41 22 809 49 33    • OMCT: Alexandra Kossin, Tel. +41 22 809 49 39[1] See www.gmediacenter.net[2] http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cat/cats50.htm. 