Syrian Arab Republic:  Death threats against Mr. Abdulkarim Rihawi, President of the Syrian Human Rights League
June 14, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2012 / JuneSyrian Arab Republic: Death threats against Mr. Abdulkarim Rihawi, President of the Syrian Human Rights LeagueTHE
OBSERVATORY - PRESS RELEASE

 
SYRIA/EGYPT: Concerns
over threats against Mr. Abdulkarim
Rihawi, President of the Syrian Human Rights League
 
Paris-Geneva,
June 13, 2012. The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), is deeply concerned about the series of anonymous death
threats received by Mr. Abdulkarim Rihawi in relation
to his human rights activities.
 
From June 11, 2012 in the evening to
June 12 in the afternoon, Mr. Rihawi received 5-6
threatening phone calls from unidentified individuals who accused him of being
an agent, a spy for the West and a traitor of the nation. The callers told him:
“how
dare you accuse Bashar of being a criminal? You are the criminal”. The caller also
used another Syrian expression which means that he “won't live more than
"them"” (“them” referring to the supporters of Syrian President Bashar El-Assad).
It has not yet been possible to identify the origin of the calls.
 
These threats occurred after Mr. Rihawi,
who is currently in exile in Cairo, Egypt, appeared on Al Jazeera Arabic on June 11, to speak
about a communication that was sent to the International Criminal Court (ICC)
by his own organisation as well as by another Syrian organisation, The Hague
Center for the Persecution of Criminals against Humanity in Syria, on the continued
widespread and systematic human
rights violations that have taken place in Syria.
 
The Observatory expresses its deepest concerns about the
death threats received by Mr. Rihawi, which are directly related to his human
rights activities. It calls on both the Syrian and
Egyptian authorities to comply with Article 1 of the 1998
United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, which states that
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to (…)
strive for the protection and realisation of human rights (...) at the national
and international levels”, as well as Article 12.2 of the same Declaration,
which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action  (...)”.
 
The Observatory further calls on the Egyptian
authorities to carry out an immediate, thorough, effective and impartial
investigation into the above mentioned acts, the result of which must be made
public, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before a civil
competent and impartial tribunal and apply to them the penal sanctions provided
by the law.
 
For
further information, please contact:
·        
FIDH: Arthur Manet : +
33 1 43 55 25 18 