Cyprus:  Judicial harassment against an anti-racism activist continues
May  7, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cyprus / 2012 / MayCyprus: Judicial harassment against an anti-racism activist continues
PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY
 
CYPRUS: Judicial harassment against an anti-racism activist 
continues
 
Paris-Geneva, May 7, 2012. The Observatory for the Protection of 
Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for 
Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), deplores 
the prolonged judicial harassment against anti-racism human rights defender Mr. 
Doros Polykarpou, Executive Director of Action for Support, Equality and 
Antiracism (KISA), an NGO working against xenophobia and racism in 
Cyprus.
 
On May 9, 2012, a court in Lanarca will resume the trial of Mr. 
Doros Polykarpou on charges of “rioting and participating in an illegal 
assembly”, charges punishable with imprisonment for up to three years. The 
judicial harassment, which has been going on for several months, has 
significantly weighed on the capacity of the NGO and its members to conduct 
their human rights activities and thus constitutes a blatant violation of 
European and international human rights standards pertaining to fundamental 
freedoms and the prohibition of discrimination and racism.
 
The charges were pressed on March 23, 2011 against Mr. Doros 
Polykarpou following the Rainbow Festival, an annual anti-racism multicultural 
event held on November 5, 2010 in Larnaca and co-organised by KISA. Though KISA 
had secured all relevant authorisations for the holding of the festival, 
participants were attacked by individuals who had gathered for a march organised 
by the Greek Resistance Movement. Some of the individuals participating in the 
latter event reportedly made racist insults along with threats against KISA 
members. 
 
Initially due to open in April 2011, the trial only begun on July 22, 
2011 and was postponed on several occasions due to dysfunction in the judicial 
proceedings: lack of information regarding criminal charges, not enough time to 
address witness statements, etc. Therefore, the proceedings have been going on 
for more than one year and are not closed yet. On April 30, 2012, the judge in 
charge affirmed that there was a prima facie case for rioting and that 
the defence should bring up its witnesses and arguments at the next hearing. 

 
This case is the most recent in a series of cases against KISA and 
its members. Actually, KISA was subjected to five other prosecutions since its 
establishment in 1998. The Observatory firmly denounces this  judicial harassment against Mr. Polykarpou 
and, more generally, against his organisation as it seems to only aim at 
stifling their human rights activities.
 
“The authorities must drop all charges held against Mr. Polykarpou 
in compliance with the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other European and international human 
rights instruments ratified by Cyprus”, said Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General. Besides, the 
Observatory urges its EU counterparts to ensure that the Cypriot authorities 
grant an effective and complete respect rights and freedoms, as provided for by 
the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights, to the human rights defenders. 

 
“The authorities must take all necessary steps with sufficient 
political will to put an end to the repression against human rights defenders, 
to protect them, rather than trying to paralyse their legitimate and necessary 
activities”, concluded Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH President. 
 
For further information, please contact:
·    FIDH: Karine Appy / Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 
18
·    OMCT: Delphine Reculeau : + 41 22 809 49 39 