Iran:  Recent arrests of and acts of harassment against several Iranian trade-unionists
January 20, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2012 / JanuaryIran: Recent arrests of and acts of harassment against several Iranian trade-unionists
URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
 
IRN 001 / 0112 / OBS 
011
Arrest / Judicial harassment
Iran
January 20, 2012
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the 
following situation in Iran. 
 Description
of the situation:
The
Observatory has been informed by the Iranian League for the Defence of Human
Rights (LDDHI) of the recent arrests of and acts of harassment against several
Iranian trade-unionists.
According
to the information received, on January 15, 2012, Mr. Shahrokh Zamani, a
member of the provisional board for reopening the Building Painting Workers
Syndicate, was arrested by the Intelligence Department of East Azerbaijan
province while at his workplace in the north western city of Tabriz and taken
to Tabriz prison, to serve his 11-year prison sentence. Presumably on the same
day, Mr. Mohammad Jarrahi, an unionist member of the Committee to Pursue
Establishment of Labour Unions, who was prosecuted in the same case as Mr.
Shahrokh Zamani, was also arrested by the same department while at his place of
residence and taken to Tabriz prison to serve his five-year sentence. Messrs. Nima
Pouryaghoub and Sassan Vahebivash, student activists also prosecuted
in the same case, were also summoned by telephone during the same period by the
Intelligence Department of East Azerbaijan province to go to prison to serve
respectively six years and six months of prison. They run the risk of being
arrested at any time[1]. 
The
Observatory was also informed of the arrest on January 17, 2012 of Mr. Sheys
Amani, founding member of the Free Union of Iranian Workers, by agents of
the Justice Department of Sanandaj, provincial capital of the Iranian
Kurdistan. The latter was then taken to the central prison of Sanandaj, where
he remains detained at the time of publication. No information could be
obtained regarding the reasons for his arrest and the existence of possible
charges against him. Mr. Sheys Amani and Mr. Sadiq Karimi, another
founding member of the Free Union of Iranian Workers, had been arrested in May
2007 and sentenced to 2.5 years in prison. Both had been released a few months
later following domestic and international mobilisation. However, recently, the
Sentences Implementation Bureau notified the two trade unionists that they had
to go back to prison to serve their sentences. At the time of publication, we
had no information on the situation of Mr. Sadiq Karimi, who also risks being
arrested at any time.
Furthermore,
on January 8, 2012, Mr. Sharif Sa'ed-Panah, a board member of the Free Union
of Iranian Workers, was arrested by plain clothed security agents at his home
in Sanandaj, for being in possession of the Union's newsletter. Likewise, Mr. Mozaffar
Salehnia, another board member of the Union, was arrested on January 5 by
security agents for the same reasons. The two were released on bail on January
19 pending trial. Exact charges are not known as of yet. 
Also,
on January 3, 2012, Mr. Maysam Nejati-Aref, an unionist at Tehran's
SAIPA car manufacturing company and a student, was arrested for defending
rights of workers by security agents at the factory and taken to an unknown
place. No specific information could be obtained as to the reasons for his
arrest and the existence of charges against him.
The
Observatory was also informed that Mr. Ebrahim Madadi, Vice-President of the
Syndicate of Workers of Tehran and Suburbs Bus Company (Sherkat-e Vahed). who was granted
leave from Evin prison on November 30, 2011 as part of a furlough[2], was arrested again on December 7,2011, when he went
to prison to extend his leave. The latter had been sentenced to three and a
half-year imprisonment in December 2008 on false charges of “endangering
national security”. As of today, he remains detained in Evin prison.
The
Observatory is further concerned with the ongoing detention and health status
of Mr. Reza Shahabi, the Treasurer and board member of Sherkat-e Vahed,
who went on hunger strike in November 2011[3] and had to be hospitalised on December 13, 2011. He
reportedly ended his hunger strike subsequently, but has been left without
proper medical attention.
Moreover,
Mr. Mohammad Hosseini, an unionist in the city of Firuzkuh, east of the
capital Tehran, was arrested in late December 2011 for defending rights of
workers by agents from the Intelligence Department and taken to a detention
centre in the city of Damavand, east of the capital Tehran, where he remains
detained as of today. No information could be obtained as to the existence of
charges against him.
Finally,
Mr. Mehdi Farahi Shandiz, a unionist teacher, was arrested during the
first week of January 2012, and taken to Evin prison to serve a three-year
prison sentence. The specific reasons of the conviction are not known as to
date. He had been previously arrested on May 1, 2010 and had spent more than
eight months in solitary confinement in section 209 of Ministry of Intelligence
in Evin prison before being released on January 26, 2011.
Actions
requested:
Please
write to the Iranian authorities and ask them to:
i.        
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of Messrs. Shahrokh Zamani, Mohammad Jarrahi, Nima
Pouryaghoub, Sassan Vahebivash, Sheys Amani, Sadiq Karimi, Sharif Sa'ed-Panah,
Mozaffar Salehnia, Maysam Nejati-Aref, Ebrahim Madadi, Reza Shahabi, Mohammad
Hosseini and Mehdi Farahi Shandiz as well as all human rights defenders and
their families in Iran;
ii.       Release Messrs. Shahrokh Zamani, Sheys Amani, Maysam Nejati-Aref,
Ebrahim Madadi, Reza Shahabi, Mohammad Hosseini and Mehdi Farahi Shandiz
immediately and unconditionally as their detention is arbitrary since it only
aims at sanctioning their human rights activities;
iii.       Put an end to any kind of
harassment - including at the judicial level - against Messrs. Shahrokh Zamani,
Mohammad Jarrahi, Nima Pouryaghoub, Sassan Vahebivash, Sheys Amani, Sadiq
Karimi, Sharif Sa'ed-Panah, Mozaffar Salehnia, Maysam Nejati-Aref, Ebrahim
Madadi, Reza Shahabi, Mohammad Hosseini and Mehdi Farahi Shandiz and more
generally against all human rights defenders in Iran.
iv.     Conform in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations
General Assembly, in particular:
-      
its article 1, which states that
“everyone has the right, individually or in association with others, to promote
the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the
national and international levels”;
-       its article 5.b, which states that “everyone has the right, individually
and in association with others, at the national and international levels, (…)
to form, join and participate in non-governmental organizations, associations
or groups”;
-       its article 12.2 which provides that “the State shall take all necessary
measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone,
individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats,
retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination,
pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her
legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”; 
v.       Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
in accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Iran.
Addresses:
Leader of the
     Islamic Republic, His Excellency Ayatollah Sayed Ali Khamenei, The Office
     of the Supreme Leader, Shahid Keshvardoost St., Jomhuri Eslami Ave.,
     Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Faxes: + 98 21 649, + 98 21 649 / 21 774
     2228, E-Mail: info_leader@leader.ir, President Mr. Mahmoud
     Ahmadinejad, the Presidency, Palestine Avenue, Azerbaijan Intersection,
     Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: + 98 21 649 5880. Email: dr-ahmadinejad@president.irHead of the
     Judiciary, His Excellency Ayatollah Sadeq Larijani, Ministry of Justice,
     c/o Public relations Office, Number 4, 2 Azizi Street, Vali Asr Ave.,
     above Pasteur Street intersection, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax:
     +98 21 879 6671 / +98 21 3 311 6567, Email: Irjpr@iranjudiciary.com / bia.judi@yahoo.com / info@dadgostary-tehran.ir Minister of Foreign
     Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Sheikh Abdolmajid Keshk-e Mesri Av,
     Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: +98-21-66743149, Email: matbuat@mfa.govH.E. Mr. Seyed Mohammad Reza Sajjadi, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of
     Iran, Chemin du Petit-Saconnex 28, 1209 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22
     7330203, Email: mission.iran@ties.itu.intEmbassy of Iran in
     Brussels, 15 a avenue Franklin Roosevelt, 1050 Bruxelles, Belgium, Fax: +
     32 2 762 39 15. Email: iran-embassy@yahoo.com 
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Iran in your respective
countries.
***
Geneva-Paris,
January 20, 2012
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
The Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH
venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to
offer them concrete support in their time of need. 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org Tel and fax FIDH +
     33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80Tel and fax OMCT +
     41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1] On November 21, 2011,
the sentences of Messrs. Shahrokh Zamani, who was arrested on June 7, 2011,
Mohammad Jarrahi, who was arrested on June 20, 2011, Nima Pouryaghoub and
Sassan Vahebivash, student activists, to respectively eleven years, five years,
six years and six months of imprisonment were upheld by the Appeal Court on
charges of “propaganda against the system” and “establishment or membership of
a group opposed to the system”. Mr. Sassan Vahebivash was released on bail on August
20. Mr. Nima Pouryaghoub was released on bail on September 8. Mr. Shahrokh
Zamani was released on bail on October 19. Mr. Mohammad Jarrahi was released on
bail on October 3. See Observatory Press Release, December 2, 2011.


[2] See Observatory Press Release, December 2, 2011.


[3] Idem. 