Colombia:  Extrajudicial execution of Mr. Carlos Guevara
April  4, 2007
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Colombia / 2007 / AprilColombia: Extrajudicial execution of Mr. Carlos GuevaraCase COL 040407 Extrajudicial execution / death threats / harassment / serious human rights violations The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requires your urgent intervention in the following situation in Colombia. Brief description of the situation It is with great concern that the International Secretariat of the OMCT has been informed by Fundación Comité de Solidaridad con los Presos Políticos (FCSPP), along with other reliable sources belonging to the SOS-Torture Network, of the extrajudicial execution of Mr. Carlos Guevara. The victim was a farmer from Vereda Ocové, municipality of Labranzagrande, in the Bocayá Department. The crime was reportedly committed by army officials. According to the information received, members of the 29th Battalion of the XVI Brigade (with headquarters in Yopal, Casanare Department) showed up outside Mr. Carlos Guevara’s residence in Vereda Ocové, Labranzagrande on March 15th 2007. They took him out of his home and made him follow the troop. An hour later, army officials told the local people that they had “eliminated a guerilla fighter”. Nevertheless, the local people saw that it was in fact Mr. Guevara’s body that the army officials were carrying. The reports state that only a few months before the execution, members of the army arrested Mr. Guevara accusing him of being a guerrilla fighter. He was presented to the Public Attorney, whom later granted him his freedom after having found no valid charges against him. This execution is said to be one of the many human rights violations against the people of the Pisba, Labranzagrande, Paya and Pajarito Municipalities, in the Province of Libertad, Bocayá. Such violations reportedly include forced relocations, threats, physical and psychological torture, arbitrary mass arrests and extrajudicial executions. Likewise, members of the aforementioned 29th Battalion have threatened several farmers from the Vereda Ocové and other towns by telling them that they would kill them if they did not leave. The International Secretariat of the OMCT condemns the extrajudicial execution of Mr. Carlos Guevara, as well as the serious human rights violations committed in the Pisba, Labranzagrande, Paya, and Pajarito Municipalities, Bocayá Department. OMCT would like to express its most deep concern over the physical and psychological integrity of the people in these areas, as well as the other Departments directly or indirectly linked to the activities of the guerilla, the army, and the paramilitary groups (3 main actors in the Colombian conflict).   The International Secretariat of the OMCT would like to express its most serious condemnation of these extremely violent events, the harassment of civilians, the alleged impunity of the perpetrators and the lack of effective protection and prevention measures by the municipal, governmental and national authorities. In doing so, OMCT urges the municipal, departmental and national authorities to instruct the military forces to respect the “Principle of Distinction of Civilians” (Principio de Distinción de civiles) recognized by International Humanitarian Law regulations. Action requested Please write to the municipal and national Colombian authorities urging them to:  Immediately take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of all of Mr. Carlos Guevara’s family members, as well as of all the farmers who have reportedly been harassed in the past by military officials belonging to the Regular Colombian Army, so that they may stay in their home towns; Order an immediate, independent, thorough and impartial investigation into the serious human rights violations committed against the people of the Libertad Province in Bocayá, especially the extrajudicial execution of Mr. Carlos Guevara, in order to identify all those responsible, provide them with a competent, independent and fair trial and apply the civil, penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; Adequately compensate Mr. Carlos Guevara’s family; Immediately implement the recommendations made by the regional and international human rights organisations, including the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights; Ensure in all circumstances the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country, in accordance with international human rights standards, particularly the Convention Against Torture which has been ratified by Colombia.  Addresses  Permanent Mission of Colombia to the United Nations in Geneva. Chemin du Champ d’Anier, 17-19, 1209 Geneva, Switzerland. FAX: + 41.22.791.07.87; TEL.:+ 41.22.798.45.55. E-mail: mission.colombia@ties.itu.int Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo, Diplomatic Mission in Brussels: FAX: +32.2.646.54.91, E-mail: colombia@emcolbru.be H.E. Álvaro Uribe Vélez, President of the Republic, Cra. 8 # 7-26, Palacio de Nariño, Santa Fe de Bogotá.Fax:+57.1.566.20.71 : auribe@presidencia.gov.co Mr.. Francisco Santos, Vice-president of the Republic, Téls.: +571334.45.07, +573.7720130, E-mail: fsantos@presidencia.gov.co ; buzon1@presidencia.gov.co Vice-presidency of the Human Rights Programme: ppdh@presidencia.gov.co Vice-presidency of the Human Rights Observatory : obserdh@presidencia.gov.co Dr. Volmar Antonio Pérez Ortiz, Defensor del Pueblo, Calle 55 # 10-32, Bogotá. Fax: + 57.1.640.04.91  E-mail: secretaria_privada@hotmail.com ; agenda@agenda.gov.co Doctor Mario Hernán Iguarán Arana,  Fiscal General de la Nación, Diagonal 22-B # 52-01, Bogotá. Fax: +57.1.570.20.00; +57.1.414.90.00 Extensión 1113, E-mail: contacto@fiscalia.gov.co;  denuncie@fiscalia.gov.co Dr. Edgardo José Maya Villazón, Procurador General de la Nación, Cra. 5 #. 15-80, Bogotá. Fax: +57.1.342.97.23; +571.284.79.49 Fax: +57.1.342.97.23; E-mail: cap@procuraduria.gov.co, E-mail: quejas@procuraduria.gov.co; webmaster@procuraduria.gov.co; cap@procuraduria.gov.co; reygon@procuraduria.gov.co; anticorrupcion@presidencia.gov.co Dr. Juan Manuel Santos Calderón, Ministro de la Defensa, Avenida El Dorado con Cra. 52 CAN, Bogotá. Fax: +57.1.222.18.74; E-mail : siden@mindefensa.gov.co; infprotocol@mindefensa.gov.co; mdn@cable.net.co Dr. Carlos Franco, Director del Programa Presidencial de Derechos Humanos y de Derecho Internacional Humanitario (DIH). E-mail: cefranco@presidencia.gov.co Dr. Fernando Ibarra, Asesor del Programa Presidencial de Derechos Humanos y de DIH. Tel.: +57.1.336.03.11, FAX: +57.1.337.46.67, E-mail: fibarra@presidencia.gov.co  Please also write to the diplomatic representations of Colombia in your countries. Geneva, 4 April 2007 Please let us know of any action undertaken, quoting this appeal’s number. 