28th February 2013: Launch of Observatory Annual Report: "Violations of the right of NGOs to funding: from harassment to criminalisation"
February 27, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Events / 2013 / February28th February 2013: Launch of Observatory Annual Report: "Violations of the right of NGOs to funding: from harassment to criminalisation"

On the occasion of the
official launch of the Annual Report 2013, in the context of the 22nd session of the UN Human Rights Council, the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OMCT-FIDH) has
organised two events on Thursday 28th February 2013: 
                                        
Thursday 28 February 2013 - 10h30: PRESS CONFERENCE at
Club Suisse de la Presse - Geneva
 
During this press conference, the
Observatory presented a global review of the
violations of the right of non-governmental organisations (NGOs) to access funding.
 
 With the participation
of:
·      
Gerald Staberock - Secretary General of
OMCT
·      
Antoine Bernard – Chief Executive
Officer of FIDH
·      
Olga Sadovskaya - Vice-Chairperson
of the Committee Against Torture and a member of OMCT General
Assembly (Russian Federation)·      
Farida Makar - Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies - CIHRS (Egypt)
·       Adilur
Rahman Khan - Secretary of Odhikar and a member of OMCT
General Assembly (Bangladesh)
genevapressclub on livestream.com. Broadcast Live Free
 
Thursday 28 February 2013 - from 1 pm to 2.30 pm : PANEL
DISCUSSION in United Nations Palais des Nations, room XXI
 
Restrictions
on NGO funding:
from
harassment to criminalisation
 
The panel discussion on "Restrictions on NGO funding: from
harassment to criminalisation" took place on Thursday, 28 February
2013, at 1 pm in room 21 of the Palais des Nations. The side event was
organised by OMCT and FIDH and co-sponsored by the Permanent Missions of
Ireland, Switzerland and The Netherlands. 
 
Introductory remarks:
·       Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights (click
here to read the opening remarks the Deputy High Commissioner delivered on this
occasion)
·       H.E. Mr. Colin Wrafter, Director, Human Rights Unit, Department of Foreign Affairs
and Trade of Ireland
         
                     
       
Chair: Antoine Bernard - FIDH CEO
 
Panel Speakers:  
·       Gerald Staberock - OMCT Secretary General
·       Olga Sadovskaya - Vice-Chairperson of the Committee Against Torture and a member of
OMCT General Assembly (Russia)  
·       Farida Makar
- CIHRS (Egypt)  
·       Adilur Rahman Khan - Secretary of Odhikar and a member of OMCT General Assembly (Bangladesh)
 
Video comments by Mr. Maina Kiai, UN Special Rapporteur on the Rights to Freedom of
Peaceful Assembly and of Association, and Ms.
Margaret Sekaggya, UN Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights
Defenders
 Maina Kiai's oral intervention / Launch of OBS report 2013 / UN Side-Event 28th Feb 2013 from OMCT / SOS-Torture Network on Vimeo.
 Margaret Sekaggya's oral intervention / Launch of OBS report 2013 / UN Side-Event 28th Feb 2013 from OMCT / SOS-Torture Network on Vimeo.
 
Leading global programme on
the protection of human rights defenders, the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), accompanies,
follows and protects human rights defenders at risk throughout the year. 