Tunisia:  OMCT opens a national consultation on the prevention of torture and ill-treatments
February  9, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / Tunisia / 2012 / FebruaryTunisia: OMCT opens a national consultation on the prevention of torture and ill-treatments




Tunisia: OMCT opens a national consultation on the prevention of torture and ill-treatments
 

 

Tunis-Geneva, February 9, 2012.Yesterday, the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) opened a 
national consultation on the prevention of torture in 
Tunisia. The ceremony was formally opened by OMCT Vice President Mr. Dick Marty, who recalled that torture and 
ill-treatment can never be justified and need to be addressed wherever they 
occur. 
 
In his address he stated: “One year ago the world witnessed the 
extraordinary courage of ordinary Tunisians taking their call for liberty and 
justice to the streets. Today we are here to support our long-standing partners 
in a new Tunisia trying to overcome one of the darkest legacies of the Ben Ali times, 
widespread and systematic practices of torture and ill-treatment”. 

 
He raised his hope that the consultation will be a step in 
strengthening the legal and constitutional framework against torture and 
ill-treatment, as well as in reforming the judicial sector. In particular, he 
recalled the right of victims to access remedies, and stressed that 
reconciliation cannot exist without truth nor justice. Finally, he underlined that the fight against torture is a central 
issue for all States, including those of long democratic tradition. The 
objective of the consultation is not to give lessons but to support efforts to 
build a system respectful of human rights in 
Tunisia.

 
Mr. Mohktar Trifi, Honorary President of the Tunisian League of Human Rights, 
underlined: "It is time now to build a system that provides effective protection 
against torture and ill-treatments. Otherwise, the current process of democratic 
transition process will remain incomplete".

 
He also raised the need to remove the prescription for the crime of 
torture, the importance to ensure access to a lawyer without prior authorisation 
of an investigating judge, and this from the moment of the arrest. He also 
underlined the importance to implement the Optional Protocol to the Convention 
Against Torture and not to delay any more the creation of a national prevention 
mechanism. Finally, he repeated the obligation of the State to open inquiries 
for any allegation of torture.

 
In his keynote address, the newly appointed Minister for Human Rights 
and Transitional Justice Mr. Semir 
Dilou reminded that the practice of torture was a systematic tool of 
political repression under Ben Ali's regime. He underlined the need to pursue 
the fight against torture and affirmed the will of the new government to lead 
reforms to eradicate torture and ill-treatments.
 

The three day conference brings together government representatives, 
civil society and national and international experts to discuss future reforms 
to eradicate torture and ill-treatment in 
Tunisia. It seeks to develop common ground on legislative and judicial 
reforms, on ensuring accountability and a culture for the respect of human 
rights, including within the security apparatus in order to ensure full 
compliance with the UN Convention Against Torture and its Optional Protocol 
ratified by Tunisia after the revolution. 

 
The conference will conclude on Friday afternoon and will be followed 
by a press debriefing at the Hotel Belvedere at 5pm on Friday 10 February, 2012.
 
For further information please contact:
Pierre-Henri Golly, OMCT Program Officer, Geneva/Tunis, +41 22 809 49 39/+216 28 42 28 87
Anouar Moalla, Tunis, +216 98 363 803 