Uganda:  Burglary of the Human Rights Awareness and Promotion Forum (HRAPF)
May 25, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Uganda / 2016 / MayUganda: Burglary of the Human Rights Awareness and Promotion Forum (HRAPF)
UGA 001 / 0515 / OBS 043
Burglary / Killing / 
Obstacles to freedom of association
Uganda
May 25, 2016
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the
following situation in Uganda.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the burglary
of the Human Rights Awareness and Promotion Forum (HRAPF) as well as the
killing of a security guard. HRAPF is a non-governmental organisation whose
mission is to promote respect and observance of human rights of marginalised
groups through advocacy, research, documentation, legal support and litigation.
 
According to the information received, on May 22, 2016, four unknown
assailants scaled the fence of the HRAPF premises, and suffocated the security
guard to death.
 
After breaking into the
premises, the assailants ransacked the offices of HRAPF Executive Director, Mr.
Adrian Jjuuko, and of the Deputy Executive Director, Mr. Edward
Mwebaza, and took a number of documents and files, including copies of the
memorandum of association, while leaving other valuable items such as laptops
and other electronic material on the spot. The Kampala Metropolitan Police Spokesperson
subsequently announced that police investigators had been sent to the crime
scene, but no perpetrators have yet been identified.
 
The Observatory expresses its utmost concern
over the burglary into HRAPF’s office and the murder of its security guard,
which is the latest illustration of a series of targeted attacks against human
rights defenders and organisations in Uganda.
 
On April 10, 2016, unknown assailants had similarly tried to burgle the
offices of the Human Rights Network for Journalists-Uganda (HRNJ-U), after
sedating their guard. On June 29, 2015, computers, valuable documents, cash and
other property of HRNJ-Uganda had already been stolen by unknown individuals.
Although an investigation was opened into these events, those responsible have
never been identified.
 
At least 26 NGO offices were reportedly burgled between 2013 and 2014,
including those of the Foundation for Human Rights Initiative (FHRI) and
DefendDefenders (East and Horn of Africa Human Rights Defenders Project).
Again, the authorities have failed to identify the perpetrators of these
attacks.
 
The Observatory calls
for an immediate, thorough, transparent investigation into the killing of the
security guard and the burglary of the HRAPF premises, as well as into all the other above-mentioned
break-ins, thefts, and acts of violence against NGOs and defenders, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before an
independent tribunal, and apply them the sanctions provided by the law.
 
Action requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Uganda,
urging them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical
and psychological integrity of HRAPF and HRNJ-U representatives and related
personnel, as well as all human rights defenders in Uganda;
 
ii. Order an immediate, thorough, transparent
investigation into the killing of the security guard assigned to the HRAPF
premises and the related burglary, as well as into the burglary attempt of
HRNJ-U offices and all the other above-mentioned break-ins, thefts and acts of
violence, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before an
independent tribunal, and apply them the sanctions provided by the law;
 
iii. Guarantee in all circumstances that human rights
defenders and organisations in Uganda are able to carry out their legitimate
human rights activities without fear of reprisals;
 
iv. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9,
1998, especially:
- Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and
in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”;
- Article 5, which underscores the right of every individual to form,
join, and participate in non-governmental organizations; and
- Article 12.2, which provides that the State shall “take all necessary
measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone,
individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats,
retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of his or
her rights”; 
 
v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Uganda.
 
Addresses:
 

President Kaguta
     Yoweri Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda, Fax: +256 (0) 414
     436 102 / + 256 41 4235459 / +256 41 4344012. E-mail: museveni@starcom.co.ug
     / aak@statehouse.go.ug
Mr. Frederick
     Ruhindi, Attorney General, and Hon. Kahinda Otafiire, Minister of Justice
     and Constitutional Affairs of Uganda, Fax: + 256 41 4250829. E-Mail: mojca@africaonline.co.ug

Mr. Mike Chibita,
     Director of Public Prosecutions, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional
     Affairs of Uganda, Fax: +256-414-258-565/341-316, Email: admin@dpp.go.ug
Ms. Hilary Onek,
     Minister of Internal Affairs of Uganda, Fax: + 256 414343088
Gen. Kale Kayihura, Inspector General of
     Police, Telephone: +256 (0) 712 755 999
H.E. Mr.
     Christopher Onyanga Aparr, Permanent Mission of Uganda to the United
     Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 340 70 30. Email: mission.uganda@ties.itu.int
Embassy of Uganda
     to the EU in Brussels, Belgium. Fax: + 32 2.763.04.38. Email: ugembrus@brutele.be


Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Uganda in
your respective country as well as to the EU diplomatic missions or embassies
in Uganda. 