Zimbabwe:  Ongoing arbitrary detention of Ms. Florence Ndlovu for discussing torture issues
May 27, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Zimbabwe / 2011 / MayZimbabwe: Ongoing arbitrary detention of Ms. Florence Ndlovu for discussing torture issues

PRESS
RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

 Zimbabwe: Ongoing arbitrary detention of Ms. Florence
Ndlovu for discussing torture issues
Paris-Geneva, May 27, 2011. The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for
Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), strongly
condemns the arbitrary arrest of two Zimbabwean human rights defenders and the
continuing detention of one of them, in a context of repression against human
rights defenders prevailing in the country. 
On May 23, 2011, Ms. Florence Ndlovu and Mr. Walter Dube, respectively Regional Coordinator for Matabeleland province and Paralegal Officer for Matabeleland, Midlands
and Masvingo provinces for Zimbabwe Human Rights Association (ZimRights), were arbitrarily arrested by the police as they
were coming out of a workshop in Tsholotsho. This arrest took place soon after
the police disrupted this workshop, which had been convened by ZimRights to
raise villagers’ awareness about torture and its effects. 
For
more than 48 hours - the legal time-frame within which one can be detained
without being brought before Court - the Zimbabwean police denied holding the
two. Yet, their illegal detention by the police was proved by the presence of
their vehicle in front of the police station in Matebeleland North province,
both on May 23 and 24. 
In
the late afternoon of May 26, 2011, the police finally confirmed their
detention at Lupane police station. Later in the day, Mr. Dube was released
with summons pending further investigation, while Ms. Ndlovu was maintained in
detention on charges of contravening Section 31 of the Criminal Law
(Codification and Reform) Act for allegedly “communicating false statements
prejudicial to the State”. The two defenders were detained during three days
without any access to their lawyers.
The
police alleged that Ms. Ndlovu told villagers who participated in ZimRights
workshop that the “police torture and assault people”. However, Ms. Ndlovu
denied the allegations and indicated that she only spoke about examples and
scenarios of torture.The
Observatory strongly condemns Ms. Florence Ndlovu’s detention and urges the
Zimbabwean authorities to release her immediately and unconditionally, as her
detention seems to merely aim at sanctioning her human rights activities, as
well as to guarantee in all circumstances her physical and psychological
integrity. 
“It
is clear that Ms. Ndlovu and Mr. Dube have been unlawfully arrested and
detained in retaliation for their legitimate human rights activities. We are
very concerned about Ms. Ndlovu’s physical and psychological integrity
considering the infamous conditions of detention at the Lupane police station.
A few months ahead of the general elections, the authorities of Zimbabwe still
have to demonstrate their maturity to tolerate free discussions on human rights
issues”, said Ms. Belhassen, FIDH President. 

“We are very concerned for all Zimbabwean
human rights defenders in a context of increasing acts of harassment and intimidation at
this moment and we accordingly call upon the authorities to put an end to all acts of harassment
against defenders in the country. The authorities should be particularly
cautious to ensure that the rights of those under arrest are not patently
violated by law enforcement bodies”, said Eric Sottas, OMCT Secretary General.

More
generally, the Observatory urges the authorities in Zimbabwe to comply with the
provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, as well as all regional and international instruments on
human rights ratified by Zimbabwe.
For further information, please contact:
·  FIDH: Karine Appy / Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18
·  OMCT:
Delphine Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 39 