OMCT E-bulletin : 51st session of the Committee against Torture - November 2013
December  3, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Reports and Publications / 2013 / DecemberOMCT E-bulletin : 51st session of the Committee against Torture - November 2013OMCT e-bulletin - November 20134 pages / 243 KB




 





OMCT E-bulletin - November 2013
51st session of the Committee
  against Torture 




 




During its
  51st session (28 October to 22 November 2013) the Committee
  against Torture examined the State reports from Andorra, Belgium, Burkina
  Faso, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Mozambique, Portugal, Poland and Uzbekistan.
The
  Committee also adopted List of Issues prior to reporting of Belarus, Germany and Ireland.


E-bulletin
  Contents
·     
  Review of the States
·     
  OMCT and Gmedia
·      Next session


 




 




Review of the States




Burkina
  Faso – Need to define and criminalise torture in
  domestic legislation
Burkina Faso’s initial report was
  presented twelve years late. The Committee recalled that the first step to
  give effect to the Convention was to define and criminalise torture. The experts
  were particularly concerned about the duration a person can be kept under
  police custody without access to a lawyer. [Read more]
Poland – Too little progress in investigation regarding CIA secret prisons
  and extraordinary rendition
Several Committee members raised
  the issue of Poland’s complicity in the CIA rendition, secret detention
  programme, as well as the use of confession made under torture. At the core
  of its concern were the lack of progress in investigating and prosecuting the
  cases of complicity into torture and in ensuring overall accountability for
  this policy. [Read more]
Andorra – Call for reducing the number of persons held in pre-trial detention
During the initial report of
  Andorra, the Committee was concerned that the crime of torture is subject to
  a statute of limitations, which may result in impunity for perpetrators of
  acts of torture.[Read more]
Belgium – Serious concern about State’s reliance on diplomatic assurances
Prison overcrowding and condition
  of detention were raised as prime concerns during the session. Another major
  focus of discussion was State’s reliance on diplomatic assurances to justify
  the deportation of foreign nationals when there is a risk of torture or
  ill-treatment.[Read more]
Kyrgyzstan – Failure to redress widespread torture and culture of impunity
The Committee was deeply concerned
  about the on-going and widespread practice of torture as well as the
  persistent pattern of failure to investigate these allegations. The State
  should immediately, thoroughly, and impartially investigate all allegations
  of torture and ill-treatment and prosecute those who are responsible. [Read
  more]
Latvia – Call to abolish statute of limitations
  for the crime of torture
The Committee challenged the statute
  of limitations for the crime of torture in Latvia, which it considered
  incompatible with the absolute nature of the prohibition of torture and
  recommended to be lifted. [Read more]
Mozambique – Serious concerns about the lack of implementation of the Convention
The experts examined the
  implementation of the Convention in Mozambique for the first time. They urged
  the State to enact legislation defining and criminalising torture. The
  experts also expressed their deep concern about allegations of extrajudicial
  executions by members of police in full impunity. [Read more]
Portugal – Length of pre-trial detention and use of solitary confinement to be
  addressed urgently
The Committee took note with
  satisfaction the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention
  against Torture (OPCAT). Alleged complicity into extraordinary renditions was
  discussed at length during the session, with a particular focus on the
  investigations undertaken into the alleged State’s involvement in rendition
  flights. [Read more]
Uzbekistan – Nothing changed: widespread torture, impunity and threats to
  defenders 
During the session, the Uzbek delegation
  in a rarely seen aggressiveness sought to dismiss allegations of torture and
  challenge CAT’s ability to rely on independent sources of information. The
  Committee recalled its independence and Claudio Grossman, CAT chairperson, reminded
  the State delegation that it was fully within its mandate to identify the
  questions to be asked and the issues to be raised, that it would then
  evaluate on the basis of its information and the answers provided. The overriding
  issue remains widespread use of torture and ill-treatment by law enforcement
  and prison officials as well as full impunity. [Read more]
 




OMCT and Gmedia




OMCT and GMEDIA organized their third workshop for journalists on “Media Empowerment
  Against Torture” from 4 to 8 November 2013. [Read more]




Next session (5 – 23 May 2014)




Consideration of
  State reports:



·     
 Cyprus
·     
    Holy See
·     
    Guinea (non-reporting State)
·     
    Lithuania


·      Montenegro
·      Sierra Leone
·      Thailand
·     
    Uruguay



The deadline for NGO submissions is 18 April 2014.
List of Issues
  (LOIs) to be adopted:
·     
  Burundi
·     
  Venezuela
The deadline for NGO submissions is 21 February
  2014.
List of Issues prior to reporting (LOIPR) to
  be adopted:



·     
    Czech Republic
·     
    Greece
·     
    Mexico


·      Norway
·      Peru
·     
    Russian Federation



NGOs submissions must be sent no later than 2 months before the opening of the session.




 
OMCT E-bulletin is
  realised with the financial aid of the European Union and the Foundation Oak.
  The content of the document lies in the responsibility of the OMCT only and
  cannot by considered as reflecting the position of the European Union or the
  Foundation Oak. 