Sudan: Ongoing harassment of human rights defenders
January 27, 2006
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2006 / JanuarySudan: Sudan: Ongoing harassment of human rights defenderscorrigendum - PRESS RELEASE Sudan: Ongoing harassment of human rights defenders  Geneva - Paris, January 27, 2006. The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), in the framework of their joint programme, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, express their deep concern about the arbitrary arrests and ongoing harassment of human rights defenders who were taking part in a civil society consultation held in central Khartoum. The consultation, which was a contribution to the work of the 6th African Union (AU) Summit of Heads of State and Government (held on January 23 - 24, 2006), was organised by the Sudan Organisation against Torture (SOAT), the International Refugee Rights Initiative and the Khartoum Centre for Human Rights and Environmental Development (KCHRED).  The NGO Forum had brought together national and international NGOs, two representatives of the United Nations, and representatives of the European Commission. Its objective was to discuss peace and justice in the region and to promote closer support for, and engagement with, the key objectives and institutions of the African Union by Sudanese and regional NGOs.  On January 22, 2006, security forces in plain clothes entered the building where the NGO Forum was being held, and detained 35 human rights and pro-democracy activists, including 22 Sudanese citizens (including a Sudanese Parliamentarian) and eight foreigners (four British, two Zimbabweans and one Italian activist), while they participated in the final session of the forum. The security forces said that the meeting was “unauthorised” and asked the names of all participants, some of whom were pushed, threatened, verbally abused and assaulted. Moreover, the conference working documents, laptop computers, files, personal papers and other equipment from the participants were confiscated.  Three hours of interrogations later, security forces attempted to release those representing international groups but hold back the Sudanese nationals. Finally, due to the refusal of foreign nationals to be separated from their Sudanese colleagues, all the defenders were released together. Two members of the organising committee were summoned for questioning overnight and released after a few hours, without being charged.  However, since then, all the participants have been followed and their activities monitored by Sudanese security forces.  The Observatory is concerned about this ongoing harassment of human rights defenders in Sudan, which takes place in a context of constant infringements of their rights and freedoms. In this regard, the Observatory recalls that a provisional Presidential Decree titled “Organisation of Humanitarian Work Act, 2005”, designed to control and criminalise national and international NGOs and their members, was presented before Parliament for ratification at the end of 2005 (See Open Letter of the Observatory, dated November 7, 2005). This Decree has still not been adopted but should be examined during a next parliamentary session.  The Observatory urges the Sudanese authorities to guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of all human rights defenders in Sudan, as well as to ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in the country in accordance with international human rights standards. In this respect, the Observatory calls on the Sudanese authorities to revise the “Organisation of Humanitarian Work Act, 2005”, in order to conform with international and regional instruments relative to freedom of association.  More generally, the Observatory calls upon the Sudanese authorities to comply with the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular its article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually or in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international level”, and article 12.2, providing that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually or in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”.    For more information, please contact : FIDH: 00 33 1 43 55 25 18 - OMCT: 00 41 22 809 49 39 