Egypt: hunger strikes launched to protest against the detention and torture of demonstrators
April 23, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / 2003 / AprilEgypt: hunger strikes launched to protest against the detention and torture of demonstratorsCase EGY 270303.3 Follow-up of Case EGY 270303 Incommunicado detention / Risk to personal integrity / Ill-treatment / Torture  Geneva, April 23rd, 2003  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information regarding the following situation in Egypt.  New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Egyptian Organisation of Human Rights (EOHR), a member of the OMCT network, of the deteriorating health conditions of two journalists who have gone on hunger strikes in response to the arbitrary arrest, detention and alleged ill-treatment and torture of anti-war demonstrators in Egypt.  According to the information received, journalists Hesham Fouad Abdel Halim and Ayman Makram Wedeah went on hunger strikes at the Journalists Syndicate on April 17th, 2003. The two journalists were taken to the Red Crescent Hospital on April 23rd, 2003 due to deteriorating health conditions. Two more journalists, Sehem Bayoumi and Noor El Hoda, will reportedly begin hunger strikes today.  According to the information received, these hunger strikes are aimed at bringing about the release of detained anti-war activists. Mohammed Hassan Hassan (student), Wael Tawfeek (journalist), Ramez Gehad Fathi Abdel Aziz (student), Omar Abdel Latif (student) and Waleed Abd El Razek (student) were all arrested on April 12th, 2003 during a peaceful assembly held by the journalists' syndicate that was protesting against the war in Iraq and Israeli action against Palestinians. Marwan Hamdi was also detained by Security Personnel and his whereabouts remain unknown. Ibrahim El Sahari (journalist) was reportedly arrested in his home. Omar Abdel Latif and Waleed Abd El Razek were released on April 15th, 2003 and reports indicate that they were tortured at state security offices in La Zoghlee. The current whereabouts of journalist Ibrahim El Sahari remain unknown and EOHR has expressed fears for his personal integrity.  OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of the hunger strikers, Hesham Fouad Halim, Ayman Makram Wedeah, Sehem Bayoumi and Noor El Hoda, as well as that of the detainees, Mohammed Hassan Hassan, Wael Tawfeek, Ramez Gehad Fathi Abdel Aziz, Marwan Hamdi and Ibrahim El Sahari who are being detained incommunicado and therefore run a heightened risk of being subjected to torture.  OMCT is also gravely concerned by the allegations that demonstrators have been subjected to ill-treatment and/or torture during detention. OMCT calls for the immediate release of all persons being detained as a result of the demonstrations, unless there are valid legal charges against them that are in line with international law, in which case OMCT calls on the authorities to ensure that they be given fair trials and guarantee their procedural rights at all times. OMCT calls upon the Egyptian Government to launch prompt and impartial investigations into all allegations of ill-treatment or torture, in order to bring the perpetrators of these acts to justice. OMCT urges the authorities to ensure that all injured persons are provided with adequate reparation, including medical assistance.  Brief reminder of the situation  According to the information received, the Egyptian authorities have been using excessive force to repress anti-war demonstrations since the outset of the conflict in Iraq. They have reportedly arrested tens of demonstrators and there are serious allegations that they have subjected a number of these detainees to ill-treatment and torture.   Demonstrations broke out in Cairo as the war in Iraq began on March 20th, 2003. Tens of thousands of demonstrators gathered in Tahrir Square in downtown Cairo and were met with violent repression by the police. It is reported that the police use disproportionate force in order to keep the demonstrators back from the American and British embassies, causing injuries to many demonstrators. The police also reportedly began arresting large numbers of people during protests held over subsequent days. According to the information received, protests broke out in Al-Azhar Mosque, Talaat Harb Square, Ramses Street, and the State Broadcasting Corporation on March 21st, 2003.   On March 21st, the police began to beat demonstrators who were pushing against a barrier on Talaat Harb Street. Police reportedly fired water cannons into the crowd, beat demonstrators with clubs and made many arrests. According to the information received, the police also occupied the Egyptian Bar Association for almost six hours, and arrested more than 15 lawyers, some of whom were beaten during this time. Many of these lawyers had reportedly previously defended anti-war demonstrators.   On April 4th, 2003, anti-war activists were arrested as they were taking part in a peaceful demonstration. It is reported that leaders and activists from the El Wafd, El Tegemoah and El Nasiree political parties went to El Sayida Square in Cairo to express their objections to the United States-led war in Iraq. Thirty-four of the demonstrators were reportedly released, while the other eleven were taken to central security headquarters in El Darassa, in order to be presented before the state prosecutors in El Khalifa.  On April 12th, 2003, the journalists syndicate held a peaceful assembly to protest the war and Israeli action against Palestinians. It is reported that individuals at the demonstration were arrested and one journalist was arrested at his home. Reports from a released detainee indicate that the arrested demonstrators have been subjected to torture and ill-treatment.    According to information received, there has been a large incidence of torture within the detention centres where the demonstrators have been held. Reports include the use of electric shocks, beatings that included the use of sticks and clubs, as well as the threat of rape towards the women, giving rise to grave concerns that the detainees in question here are being or risk being subjected to such treatment. For more information concerning the identities of these detainees, please see the three previous appeals concerning this case.   Action requested:  Please write to the authorities in Egypt urging them to:  i.	immediately locate the whereabouts of all the afore-mentioned detainees; ii.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the hunger strikers and the detainees; iii.	order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iv.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances these acts of torture in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; v.	ensure that adequate reparation is provided to the afore-mentioned persons, including adequate medical assistance for all persons who require it; vi.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with international human rights standards.  Addresses: §	H.E. President Mohammad Hosni Mubarak, Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, Email: Webmaster@presidency.gov.eg §	H.E. Faruq Sayf al-Nasr, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, Midan Lazoghly, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 795 8103, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg §	H.E. General Habib Ibrahim El Adly, Minister of the Interior, Al – Sheik Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: + 202 579 2031, e-mail: moi@idsc.gov  Please also write to the embassies of Egypt in your respective country. Geneva, April 23rd, 2003 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 