Azerbaijan:  Repression escalates in run-up to European Games - International Fact-Finding Mission Report
April 21, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Reports and Publications / Azerbaijan / 2015 / AprilAzerbaijan: Repression escalates in run-up to European Games - International Fact-Finding Mission ReportReport_Azerbaijan_EN52 pages / 847 KB
Paris-Geneva,
21 April 2015 – Repression of Azeri
civil society, NGOs and journalists has escalated significantly as the date of
the Baku European Games approaches, says the Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders in a report published today. The report documents the
repression of eight emblematic human rights defenders who have been arbitrarily
detained, and details the series of legislative amendments recently adopted to
silence independent voices. 
“Most
of the high-level leaders of the independent NGOs have been arrested. The
conditions of detention are abominable and the declining health of some of
them, such as Leyla
Yunus and Intigam Aliyev is of serious concern,” stated Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General.
In
January 2015, the Observatory led a fact-finding mission to Baku to meet with
civil society organisations. Despite several requests submitted to the
authorities, the delegation was not allowed to visit the imprisoned defenders. 
In
the last two years, many former Soviet States have been severely cracked down
on civil society by introducing extremely repressive policies. These policies,
largely inspired by laws recently adopted in Russia, are paradoxically enforced
in contexts where states try to improve their international image, often by
hosting major public events. It was the case in 2014, when Belarus hosted the
World Hockey Championship, and in Russia with the Olympic Games in Sotchi. It
is now the case of Azerbaijan with the European Games in June 2015. The
international community must use this opportunity to express its concern with
Azeri authorities regarding human rights abuses and the situation the people
and organisations defending these rights face in Azerbaijan.
“We hope that the leaders of the countries participating in the European
Games will take advantage of the opportunity to denounce the human rights
situation in Azerbaijan. That is why we are asking
them officially to condition their participation in the opening ceremony on the release of all imprisoned human rights defenders,” stated Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH Honorary President and head of the
delegation to Baku in January 2015. “As relations with Russia sour, Azerbaijan
is becoming the cornerstone of the alternative energy road map, but this should
not interfere. The international community, and especially the European
countries, must be firm”  she
added.
In
Azerbaijan, the adoption of an increasingly repressive policy is also a
reflection of events that have taken place on the international stage and on
the borders of Azerbaijan. The Azeri government considers the Arab Spring, the
large demonstrations in Russia and Turkey, the events in Ukraine, and the
conflict in the Nagorno-Karabakh region to be “threats” to national stability.
Before
cracking down on NGOs and their leaders in 2014, several laws were amended to
restrict the activities of civil society. New laws were adopted that increased
the administrative requirements and imposed more frequent inspections and
stricter reporting requirements. These laws make it de facto impossible
for unregistered NGOs to receive and use grants in accordance with the law. The
authorities have used these new regulations to prosecute NGO leaders by
accusing them of financial irregularities.
The
Report is available for download on the
OMCT website:
in French (Rapport_Azerbaijan_FR)
in English (Report_Azerbaijan_EN)
in Russian (Report_Azerbaijan_RU)-END-

The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders.

For more information, please contact :
FIDH: Lucie Kroening (French / English / German / Arabic) - Tel: +33 6 48 05 91
57 (Paris) 
FIDH: Arthur Manet (French / English / Spanish) - Tel: +33 6 72 28 42 94
(Paris)
OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui (French / English / Spanish) - Tel: +41 22
809 49 39 (Geneva) 