Sudan:  Sudan: Arbitrary detention and torture of eight university students.
October 24, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2005 / OctoberSudan: Sudan: Arbitrary detention and torture of eight university students.Case SDN 241005Arbitrary detention / Torture   The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information concerning the following situation in Sudan.  Brief description of the situationThe International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudan Organisation Against Torture (SOAT), a member of the OMCT network, that on 17 October 2005 at 17:10hrs, security officers and security guards at Omdurman Islamic University, detained and reportedly tortured eight student activists from Khartoum University, Gazeera University, Omdurman Islamic University and Alahlia University.   The details of the students are as follows: 1.      Abdelsalam Hassabu Ibrahim, (29 yrs), student at Gazeera University, Faculty of Education, member of Sudanese Students Democratic Front (SSDF) 2.      Abdelmohsin Alniaama Abdelmalik, (27 yrs), graduated in December 2005 from Faculty of Engineering at Omdurman Islamic University 3.      Yasin Mohamed Ahmed Alzain, (29 yrs), student at Omdurman Alahlia University, Faculty of Arts, member of SSDF 4.      Mogahid Yousif Mohamed Ahmed, (24 yrs), student at University of Khartoum, Faculty of Education, member of SSDF 5.      Mokhlis Mohamed Ali Abdallah, student at Khartoum University, Faculty of Science  6.      Abdelazeez Gomaa Yahia (25yrs), student at Khartoum University, Faculty of Arts, member of SSDF 7.      Alrazi Hassabu Ibrahim (24 yrs), student at Alnilain University, Faculty of Commerce member of SSDF 8.      Mohamed Ibrahim Yousif (26 yrs), student at Khartoum University, Faculty of Arts, member of SSDF  According to the information received, the students, who are all members of Al-Gazeera and Al-Managil Farmers’ Sons Alliance (Tahaluf Abnaa Mozariaae Algazeera wa Almanagil), were detained inside the university accommodation halls after they held a public meeting inside the halls on the situation of farmers in Algazeera and Almnanagil, following the government policies of privatisation.   Initially, security officers and the security guards questioned the students together about their political affiliations. The students were then ordered and forced into a room individually.   Whilst in the room, the students were reportedly subjected to torture and ill treatment. They were reportedly slapped on their faces and ears, beaten with water hoses, with the butt of machine guns and with sticks. The students were also questioned and ordered to confess their political affiliations and the affiliations of the leading members of Al -Gazeera and Al-Managel Farmers Alliance.   The students were eventually released at 02:00 am on 18 October 2005, after they were forced to sign a document stating that they would not discuss their detention and treatment with anyone including any human rights organisation.   Requested Action:Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:  i.	guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned persons; ii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into these events and in particular the alleged torture of the students, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply to them the civil, penal and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; iii.	guarantee that adequate medical care is provided to all those who sustained injuries; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international humanitarian law and human rights standards.  Addresses:His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, President' s Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 783223 Mr. Al Zubeir Beshir Taha, Minister of Interior, P.O. Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 779 383 Mr. Lam Akol Ajawin, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affair, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 779383  Dr. Abdelmuneim Osman Mohamed Taha, Advisory Council for Human Rights, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 770883 His Excellency Ambassador Mr. Mohamed Al- Hassan Ahmed Al-Haj, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 335, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 731 26 56, +41 22 716 19 70, E-mail: mission.sudan@ties.itu.int.  Please also write to the embassies of Sudan in your respective country.  Geneva, 24th October 2005  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 