Intervention to the 60th session of the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights
May 12, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Burundi / 2017 / MayIntervention to the 60th session of the African Commission on Human and Peoples' RightsDownload full article9 pages / 388 KB
AFRICAN COMMISSION ON HUMAN AND PEOPLES'
RIGHTS 
60th Ordinary Session
Niamey, Niger
May 8 - 22,
2017
Contribution of the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) 
and FIDH (the International Federation for
Human Rights) 
In the framework of their partnership, 
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders 
Madam Chairperson, Distinguished
Commissioners and State Delegates,
The World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and FIDH, under the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, thank the African Commission on
Human and Peoples’ Rights (ACHPR) for this opportunity to raise some of the key
issues with respect to the situation of human rights defenders in Africa.
While States have the duty to protect human rights
defenders and to ensure that they operate in a safe and enabling environment,
attacks, threats, judicial harassment, restrictive laws, smear campaigns
against them continue to perpetuate an environment of hostility towards their
activities.
1. Pursuit of criminalisation, threats and
violence to silence human rights defenders
In several
countries, we are concerned that human rights defenders are criminalised in
relation to legitimate human rights activities recognised and protected under
regional and international human rights instruments. A significant number of
the harassment and attacks occurred in electoral contexts or against defenders
promoting democracy or electoral rights.
In
Burundi, since April 2015, following President
Pierre Nkurunziza’s third term bid, human rights defenders continue to face
increased intimidation, harassment, physical attacks and in the most worrying cases,
enforced disappearance. Many had to flee the country and were facing
intimidation in their country of relocation.
The Observatory remains particularly concerned by the
fate of Ms. Marie-Claudette Kwizera,
Treasurer of the Ligue Burundaise
des Droits de l’Homme « ITEKA », who was forcibly
disappeared on December 10, 2015. To date, Burundian authorities have refused
to provide any information about her fate or whereabouts. 
Moreover,
human rights defenders and organisations who cooperate with the international
human rights system to denounce rampant violations in Burundi face specific
acts of reprisals. For instance, in the aftermath of the review by the United
Nations (UN) Committee Against Torture (CAT) of the country’s human rights
crisis, the Government requested to disbar four human rights lawyers who had
participated in the CAT session, at the end of July 2016. On January 17, 2017,
the Court of Appeal of Bujumbura eventually disbarred Messrs. Armel
Niyongere, President of Action
chrétienne pour l'abolition de la torture (ACAT) - Burundi and
Director of SOS-Torture/Burundi, Vital Nshimirimana, General
Delegate of the Forum pour le
Reinforcement de la Société Civile (FORSC), and Dieudonné Bashirahishize,
Vice President of the Bar Association of the East African Community.
Furthermore, the Court decided to suspend temporarily the fourth lawyer,
Mr. Lambert Nigarura, President of the Coalition Burundaise pour la CPI (CB-CPI). 
In Chad, on April 6, 2017, Mr. Nadjo Kaina Palmer, Coordinator of the youth movement “Iyina” (“We
are tired” in local Arabic), affiliated with the coalition “Ca suffit” (“It’s
enough”) and Coordinator for “Tournons La Page - Tchad” was summoned and
arrested by members of the National Agency of Security. He had organised a press
conference three days before to call for a protest against impunity and bad
governance on the one-year anniversary of the presidential elections. On May 4,
2017, a high court in N’Djamena sentenced Messrs. Nadjo Kaina Palmer and
Bertrand Solo, also a leader of Iyina to a six-month suspended sentence for
“attempting to manipulate a mob”. The two were released after the verdict.
In the Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC), Mr. Jean-Marie Kabengele Ilunga, ahuman rights lawyer who has been
particularly active in the case of the killing of Floribert Chebeya and Fidèle
Bazana from Voix des sans Voix (VSV),has been facing threats
and intimidations. On the night
between October 11 and 12, 2016, he was informed by his colleagues that agents
of the ANR (National Intelligence Agency), the SNS (National Security Service)
and military were present around the Catholic University of Congo in Kinshasa,
where he was assisting to the election of the new Chairman of the Bar
Association, for which he presented his candidacy, in a clear act of
intimidation. He had also received in the past months several threatening text
messages from a telephone belonging to an ANR agent.
Most
recently, on February 24, 2017, Mr. Paul
Nsapu, FIDH Deputy Secretary General and President of the Ligue des électeurs (LE),
received two text messages containing death threats against him and his family,
which are allegedly related to Mr. Nsapu’s human rights activities denouncing
killings and other gross human rights violations, as well as for his open
support to peaceful youth citizens’ movements such as LUCHA, Filimbi and Compte à rebours, who are victims of
harassment, intimidations, arrests and arbitrary detentions.
Indeed,
dozens of members of youth citizens’ movements have suffered episodes of
arbitrary arrest and detention, as well as, for some of them, trumped-up
charges and ill-treatment in the DRC. Between October 24 and December 21, 2016,
at least 37 members of such pro-democracy groups were arrested including while
peacefully protesting or during press conferences to launch the media campaign
‘Bye bye Kabila’. Accused of “inciting rebellion against authorities”, all have
been released since then. Amongst them, Mr. Fabrice Kubuya, member of the LUCHA movement was detained from
December 19, 2016 to March 19, 2017. Again in April 2017, nearly 70 members of
citizens’ movement were arrested, detained and further released. Police
violence was reported upon release of the human rights defenders.
In Kenya, an
anti-corruption demonstration
co-organised on November 3, 2016, by the
Kenya Human Rights Commission (KHRC), PAWA 254, the Inter-Religious Council,
Transparency International Kenya, Civil Society Reference Group, Sauti ya
Wanjiku, Katiba Institute among others was
violently repressed. The police fired tear gas and used water canons.
Moreover, some police officers beat up unarmed protesters and journalists. At
least 10 activists and journalists were injured, and 24 peaceful protesters
were arbitrarily arrested, briefly held at the Central and Parliament police
stations and released a few hours later without charges. Unfortunately, no
investigation was conducted into these allegations of police violence.
In Zimbabwe,
on February 1, 2017, Pastor Evan
Mawarire was charged by the Zimbabwe Republic Police (ZRP) with “subverting
a constitutional government”. The ZRP claims that the cleric has been “inciting
Zimbabweans from all walks of life either locally or internationally to
revolt and overthrow a constitutionally elected Government”. That includes
allegations that Pastor Evan Mawarire has incited some Zimbabweans living in
the USA and “all over the world” through social media to converge in New York
on September 22, 2016 to “confront” President Mugabe, who was attending the
United Nations General Assembly and order him to “immediately” resign from his
position accusing him of destroying the country. President Mugabe himself
publicly attacked Pastor Evan Mawarire accusing him of being a “great shame”
and a “disgrace” for “allowing himself to demonstrate against the country”. On
February 8, 2017, the Harare High Court granted a USD 300 (280 euros) bail to
Pastor Mawarire, after finding the State’s case “weak”, with “no compelling
reasons” to maintain him in pre-trial detention. The bail was accompanied by
the obligation to report twice a week to the Arondale police station. In
addition, Pastor Mawarire had to surrender his passport to the Clerk of the
Harare Magistrates Court and was urged not to interfere with State witnesses.
His judicial harassment continues, after several postponements the next hearing
in his case is scheduled on June 15, 2017.
Moreover,
human rights defenders working on sensitive issues have also been particularly
targeted.
In Egypt,
Mr. Negad El-Borai, Director of the “United Group – Attorneys-at-law,
Legal Advisors” (United Group) and judges Assem Abel Gabbar, former Deputy Chief
Justice of the Court of Cassation, and Hesham Raouf, who sits at Cairo’s
Appeal Court and former Justice Minister’s assistant, have been facing charges
for drafting and promoting an anti-torture bill. On March 30, 2017, the Supreme
Judicial Council referred the two judges to appear on April 24 - and then
postponed the hearing to June 19 - before the ‎Disciplinary Council to
consider their dismissal for “engaging in political activities”, while Mr.
El-Borai is facing criminal charges of “establishing an unlicensed entity with
the intent of inciting resistance wards to the authorities”, “implementing human
rights activities without license”, “deliberately spreading false information
with the purpose of harming public order or public interest” and “receiving
funds from the National Center for State Courts (NCSC)” in another
investigation regarding the same anti-torture activity. Their judicial and
disciplinary harassment is ongoing.
In Djibouti, Mr. Omar Ali Ewado, co-founder of the Djiboutian League for Human
Rights (LDDH), was arrested on March 19, 2017 by agents of the Services of
Documentation and Security, and subsequently released without charges on March
29, 2017. He had already been arrested and released several times before and he
had also been victim of other forms of harassment, such as being fired from his
job as a professor and having his salary suspended by the National Ministry of
Education.
In Sudan, while welcoming the fact that
the charges against three human rights defenders working at the Centre for
Training and Human Development in Sudan (TRACKs), namely Mr. Al Hassan
Kheiry, a computer technician, Ms. Arwa Elrabie, the Administration
Manager, Ms. Imani-Leyla Raye, a student volunteer, were eventually
dropped in January 2017, the Observatory expresses its concern about the
sentencing, on March 5, 2017, of Mr. Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar, TRACKs
Director, and Mr. Midhat A Hamdan, a trainer,for “dissemination of false information” and “possession of immoral
material”, as well as of Mr. Mustafa Adam, who had delivered training for TRACKs, for “espionage”. The three were sentenced to
the same punishment: one-year imprisonment and a fine of 50,000 SDG (approx.
7,376 Euros) each. Detained since May 2016, the three men were released the
following day from Al-Huda prison in Omdurman after their fines were fully
paid, as they had already served their sentence. It has to be noted
that the trial proceedings were marred by serious violations of standards of
fair trial.
Furthermore, human rights defender Dr. Mudawi Ibrahim Adam has been
arbitrarily detained since December 7, 2016, by the National Intelligence and
Security Services (NISS), without charges nor access to legal representation
and despite a decision on March 26, 2017, by the Attorney General to release
him on bail. This prolonged detention without access to
counsel constitutes a clear violation of international human
rights norms, which prohibit arbitrary or unlawful detention. Allegedly, Dr.
Mudawi has also been prevented from receiving essential medication for a pre-existing
heart condition, he is extremely fragile with decreasing blood pressure. In
addition, from February 2 to 14, 2017, Dr. Mudawi went on a hunger strike to
protest his illegal detention. As a consequence his health is increasingly and
worryingly deteriorating.
2. Economic, land and environmental rights defenders particularly at
risk
Throughout
the African continent, our organisations remain concerned by the gravity of
attacks against land and environmental rights defenders.
In Cameroon, detained since May 2016,
Messrs. Abue Philip Kpwe, Divine Biame, Cyprian Azong and Bernard
Fuh, members of the Esu Youth Development Association (EYDA), were finally
released on May 4, 2017, nearly five months after they had been granted bail by
the North-West Court. Arrested on spurious grounds of “depredation by band”, in
relation to their opposition to land-grabbing, charges have not been dropped
and proceedings are ongoing before Bamenda’s Appeal Court. The four leaders are being prosecuted alongside five
other Esu leaders, namely Messrs. Redemption Godlove, Ephraim Kagha
Mbong, Emmanuel Wung, Ivo Meh and Williams Meh, and if
convicted, the nine face 10 to 20 years in prison. Furthermore, Mr. Robert
Fon, lawyer of the nine Esu leaders was detained from March 16 to 27, 2017,
on charges of “acts of terrorism” and “insurrection”. He was eventually
released, as there was no evidence of his wrongdoing.
The Observatory is also concerned about the ongoing judicial harassment
and acts of intimidations targeting several members of the Organic Farming for
Gorillas (OFFGO), a group of farmers created in September 2015 to promote
organic farming, environmental protection, opposing land grabbing and working
for the protection of the cross-river gorilla in Mbengwi. The hearing of OFFGO
board members Matthias Awazi and Humfred Manjo, who are facing
trumped-up charges leading to up to three years in prison, has not yet taken
place. In addition, the village of Tudig, in Mbengwi, where OFFGO has its
headquarters, and several of its members have been the target of several
security incidents since mid-2016 until February 2017. On March 13, 2017, the
village Regent of Tudig, Mr. Prince Vincent Awazi, a
board member of OFFGO, received a message on his phone from one of the attackers,
warning the villagers to be vigilant and that they “will suffer”. Further
security incidents were reported in the village of Tudig on April 7 and 8,
2017, when three unknown men warned the village regent “to prepare for his own
funeral” and that “others will follow soon”.
Moreover, in Kenya, on
October 31, 2016, eight members of the network organisation “Building
Africa” were arrested together with two witnesses to a beneficiary of the
organisation’s services while attending a public meeting about land grabbing
and corruption within the Phase 1 and 2 of the Taita Taveta Settlement Project
in the city of Taveta. They were charged by the Taveta Court the day after with
“participation in an unlawful assembly”, in breach of Section 79 of the Penal
Code. The Court set bond at 300,000 KSH (approximately 2,700 EUR) for each of
the accused, but the defendants filed an application to the High Court asking
for the review of the excessive bond imposed on them. The hearing took place on
November 23, 2016 and on December 21, the defenders were released on a personal
surety, after the court indicated that they had erred in their ruling, and
reduced the bail to 50,000 KSH (approximately 450 EUR) each.
Finally, in Liberia, Mr. Alfred Lahai Brownell, Lead Advocate of Green Advocates and his
staff faced judicial harassment and threats. Starting from October 28, 2016,
police officers issued numerous arrest warrants against Mr. Alfred Brownell,
his staff and even his family for allegedly failing to respond to a subpoena enquiry
to provide testimony in connection with a war crimes case involving Gus van
Kouwenhoven, a Dutch citizen. The series of arrest warrants seems to be linked
to the community-based advocacy work carried out by Green Advocate,
specifically in the province of Sinoe, where the organisation helped the
communities to file complaints against human rights violations committed by the
enterprise Golden Veroleum, a branch of the Singapore company Golden Agri Ressources, for
the exploitation of palm oil. Green advocates’ premises and Alfred Brownell’s
house were stormed by the police. Although the arrest warrants and contempt
proceedings against Mr. Alfred Brownell and Green advocates’ staff were
officially dropped on November 21, 2016, it is worrisome that high ranking
officials in the Liberian government, among whom the President herself,
publicly condemned Green Advocates for weakening the national sovereignty.
3. Restrictions to freedom of
association and assembly, and reprisals against freedom of expression defenders

The worldwide trend undertaken by some
States to restrict freedom of association and hinder the work of human rights
defenders by enacting an arsenal of restrictive laws has been particularly
spreading across Africa, where authorities increasingly aim to control,
paralyse or even eradicate independent civil society, in blatant
breach of basic human rights standards.
The most recent
illustration of this trend of repression occurred in Kenya, where on January 6, 2017 the
Interior Principal Secretary Karanja Kibicho wrote to all the 47 county
commissioners directing them to shut down NGOs that are not properly licensed
or are implementing projects that they have not been registered to undertake.
The directive also requires all foreign employees working for NGOs in the
country to produce on demand a valid work permit issued by the Directorate of
Immigration Services and they must also have a recommendation letter from the
NGO Coordination Board. This happens under the same administration that has been undermining,
for more than four years since its signing into law on January 14, 2013, the
commencement of the Public Benefit Organisation (PBO) Act 2013, a law seeking
to provide an enabling environment for NGOs. 
In
addition, on January 6, 2017, the NGO Coordination Board approached KHRC
through email, threatening them to commence an inquiry into allegations of a
number of acts of mismanagement and offences allegedly perpetrated by KHRC,
which were included in an “internal memorandum” issued by the NGO Board on
November 4, 2016. The document which had not been notified to the organisation
addressed several government agencies with a number of recommendations against
KHRC. Amongst other, it advised the Central Bank of Kenya to take steps to
freeze KHRC’s bank accounts. Other institutions were requested to take steps to
commence criminal and financial investigations against KHRC. It is not the first time that the NGO Board is
publicly discrediting KHRC and other human rights organisations in Kenya. The
KHRC requested and obtained a meeting with the NGO Board to clarify the
situation. 
Moreover,
in Burundi, on January 3, 2017 the Burundian authorities announced that the Iteka
League had been permanently removed from the list of organisations allowed
to work in the country since December 21, 2016, for having allegedly “damaged
the image of the country and divided the Burundian community”. This occurred
after the Ministry of Interior and Patriotic Training published a directive
on October 24, 2016, to suspend provisionally a number of non-profit
associations, namely SOS-Torture/Burundi, the Iteka League, the Coalition de
la Société Civile pour le Monitoring Electorale (COSOME), the Coalition
Burundaise pour la CPI (CB-CPI) et the Union Burundaise des
Journalistes (UBJ). A week earlier, on October 19, 2016, the same
Ministry had passed a similar directive to permanently remove 5 other NGOs from
the Ministry's List of Associations operating in Burundi, i.e. the Forum
pour le reinforcement de la société civile (FORSC) the Forum pour la conscience et le développement
(FOCODE), the Action chrétienne pour l'abolition de la torture
(ACAT), l'Association burundaise pour la protection des droits humains et
des personnes détenues (APRODH) and the Réseau des citoyens
probes (RCP). 
Furthermore, respectively
on December 28 and 23, 2016, the National Assembly adopted in final reading two
bills, which aim to closely monitor and control the actions of local and
international NGOs in Burundi. The first bill requires local NGOs to obtain the
authorization of the Minister of Interior before carrying out any activity and
it also obliges NGOs to channel any foreign funding that they might receive
through the Burundian Central Bank. The second bill requires foreign NGOs to
carry out activities that conform with the priorities defined by the Burundian
Government. 
Civil
society in Egypt also continues to face an unprecedented wave of attacks
by the authorities as part of the case known as the “foreign funding case No. 173”, a
five-year-old investigation into the funding and registration of independent
human rights groups. On December
14, 2016, the assets of Ms. Azza Soliman,
founder of the Centre for Egyptian Women Legal Aid (CEWLA), and the ones of her
law firm were frozen, one week after she had been arrested and released on bail
on December 7. This was the first arrest warrant to be issued against an NGO
worker within the foreign funding case. Furthermore, on January 11, 2017, the assets of Ms. Mozn Hassan,
Founder and Executive Director of Nazra for Feminist Studies (Nazra), Mr. Mohamed Zarea, Director of the Arab
Penal Reform Organization (APRO), Mr. Atef
Hafez, legal researcher at APRO, as well as those held by the two aforementioned
organisations were frozen. 
The Observatory furthermore denounces the systematic use of travel bans against
human rights defenders by the Egyptian government as a tool to crackdown
all independent civil society in the country. For instance, on November 17,
2016, Ms. Azza Soliman was prevented from boarding a plane, and the same
happened to Ms. Aida Seif El-Dawla, Director and one of the
founders of El Nadeem Center for the Rehabilitation of Victims of Torture and
Violence (El Nadeem Center) on November 23, as well as on January 26, 2017 to
Mr. Negad El-Borai.
Moreover, after two closure
attempts in 2016, on February 9, 2017,
the three flats occupied by El Nadeem
Center were sealed in application of an “administrative closing order”
issued on February 17, 2016 by the Ministry of Health (MoH) to shut down the
clinic for allegedly “breaching license conditions”. However, the closure of
two of the three flats occupied by El Nadeem Center has been considered
illegal, since they were not included in the MoH closing order, and therefore
they have been reopened on April 11, 2017. However, the clinic remains closed
as of today, while the administrative proceedings against the MoH closing order
are ongoing. El Nadeem Center has been licensed as a medical clinic since 1993
and has provided hundreds of torture victims with vital services, including
counselling and legal assistance. 
Alongside
the judicial harassment of Egyptian human rights defenders, in the last quarter
of year 2016, authorities attempted twice to amend the NGO regulatory
framework. The two versions of draft NGO laws introduce very restrictive
provisions which could lead to the eradication of existing human rights groups
and prevent the setting-up of new ones. After the approval by the Cabinet on
September 8, 2016 of a draft NGO law, on November 15, 2016, the
Egyptian Parliament adopted another draft NGO law, drafted by its chairman
Abdel Hadi el Qasabi. This latter contained even more draconian provisions than
the previous one and, should it come
into force, it would close any remaining space for conducting human
rights work in Egypt. Of particular concern is the attempt of the Egyptian
Parliament to redefine authorised field of action for civil society
organisations as being necessarily determined by the State’s agenda. In
particular, under this new legal framework, NGOs would not be allowed to
conduct work that may cause harm to “national security”, “law and order”,
“public morals”, or “public health”, terms that are subject to the discretionary
interpretation of government agencies. Allegedly, the NGO law was sent in
December 2016 to the President for signature, but after strong international
pressure from both civil society and the international community, as of today,
there is no further information on the status of such law.
In Morocco, on September 30, 2016, two
Saharawi young activists belonging to the
l’Equipe Média, Messrs. Amidan Said and Brahim Laajail,
were arbitrary arrested and
tortured by the Moroccan Security forces at Guelmim. They were interrogated
several times and respectively charged with “insulting the police” and
“possession and use of drugs”, as well as “non-presentation of identity
documents”. The two activists were subsequently released awaiting trial. On
November 29, 2016, the two were sentenced to three and two months in jail
respectively, without having to spend actual time in jail, for "attacking
a public employee”. They both deny the charges and are appealing the court
decision.
Finally, the
Observatory is concerned about the ongoing judicial harassment under charges of
“threat to State security” of Messrs.
Maâti Monjib, historian, journalist and President of the association
“Freedom Now” for freedom of expression in Morocco,
Hisham Almiraat, President of the Association
des droits numériques (ADN), Hicham Mansouri, Project Officer at the
Association marocaine pour le journalisme
d’investigation (AMJI), Mohamed Essabr, President of the Association marocaine d’éducation de la
jeunesse (AMEJ), Abdessamad Ait Aicha, former training project
Coordinator of the Centre Ibn Rochd,
journalist and member of the AMJI. Furthermore, Mr. Rachid Tarik and Ms.
Maria Moukrim, respectively President and former President of the AMJI
are accused of receiving foreign funding without notifying the authorities. On
January 25, 2017, the court decided to postpone their hearing for the sixth
time, rescheduling it on May 24, 2017.
4. Human right defenders in Kenya at risk
ahead of the general elections
Concerned by
the high levels of police violence against defenders and attempts to restrict
their working environment, the Observatory carried out an international
fact-finding mission in Kenya in October 2016. The report, presented in Niamey
during the NGO Forum, raised three main concerns. 
First, human
rights defenders are often confronted to high levels of police violence,
especially when trying to hold public officials accountable for human rights
violations, and this happens in widespread impunity, despite the State and
police reforms in place. The violence includes harassment, torture, enforced
disappearances and extrajudicial killings, including under the guise of
security and counter-terrorism operations. Moreover, the disproportionate use
of force in managing public protests calls into question the prevailing
standards in public order management and their actual use by the police.
Second, the
increasing pattern of criminalisation and intimidation of human rights
defenders, through trumped-up charges, episodes of frequent arrests, detentions
in police stations and long trials, represent a serious concern, since they are
used as a means to harass, traumatise and exhaust defenders, and, in fine,
prevent them from defending human rights.
Third,
delays in the commencement of the Public Benefit Organisations (PBO) Act 2013,
which streamlines the regulation of the civil society sector, have left the
door open for abuses and administrative harassment of civil society
organisations (CSOs), whose sector is still regulated by the NGO Coordination
Act 1990. As a result, CSOs continue to operate in a hostile environment,
characterized by the threat of arbitrary de-registration and asset freezes,
continuous attacks and smearing campaigns. It is worrying that the past two
years have witnessed various failed attempts to incorporate restrictive
amendments into the PBO Act 2013, including severe restrictions to access to
foreign funding, aimed at undermining its significant improvements.
5. Recommendations: 
1) In view of the above-mentioned elements,
the Observatory reminds States Parties of their obligation to comply with all
the provisions of the African Charter, in particular those relating to the
protection of human rights defenders. In that regard, States should immediately
and unconditionally:
- Implement all the provisions of the 1998
United Nations (UN) Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, especially by
guaranteeing in all circumstances their physical and psychological integrity
and their capacity to operate in a safe and enabling environment;
- Release all defenders who are
arbitrarily detained for their activities of promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, in particular freedoms of expression, peaceful
assembly and association;
- Develop differentiated measures for the
protection of the most vulnerable groups of human rights defenders such as land
and environmental rights defenders, defenders working in rural areas, woman
human rights defenders or defenders working on LGBTI issues;
- Put an end to all acts of harassment -
including at the judicial level - against human rights defenders;
- Order immediate, thorough, transparent
investigations into allegations of violations of the rights of human rights
defenders, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before an
independent tribunal, and apply them the sanctions provided by the law;
- Refrain from adopting any provisions
that do not comply with international and African standards with respect to the
exercise of the right to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and
association, and abrogate or revise any such provisions that may be in force;
- Send a standing invitation to the UN and
ACHPR’s Special Rapporteurs on Human Rights Defenders and facilitate their
country visits.
2) In particular, on the situation of
human rights defenders in Kenya, the Observatory calls upon the ACHPR to:
- Address the critical situation of
human rights defenders in Kenya ahead of the August general elections during
the 60th session of the ACHPR, including through a resolution calling for free,
peaceful and democratic general elections and conforming to the principles of
the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights with respect to freedoms of
association, assembly and expression as well as to the African Charter on
Democracy, Elections and Governance;
- Deploy human rights monitors in
Kenya ahead of August 2017 general elections to document instances of violation
and abrogation of freedoms of association, assembly and expression; 
- Publicly denounce the vulnerability
of human rights defenders in Kenya, in particular the legal and practical
infringements to their freedoms of association, expression and assembly; 
- Call upon the Kenyan authorities to
guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of human rights defenders
and ensure that those found responsible for human rights abuses are held
accountable; 
- Call upon the Kenyan authorities to
fully conform its national legal and institutional framework with the human
rights guarantees provided by regional and international treaties, as well as
by the Constitution of Kenya;
 
- Call upon Kenya to make a
declaration under Article 34.6 of the Protocol to the African Charter on the
establishment of the African Court, allowing direct access to the Court to NGOs
and individuals.
3) More
generally, the Observatory also calls upon the ACHPR to:
- Highlight
the legitimate work carried out by human rights defenders, and the need for
their protection from harassment and attacks; 
- Systematically raise the question of the situation of human rights
defenders as well as denounce and condemn all human rights violations they face
during the examination of the periodic reports of States parties to the ACHPR,
and on the occasion of all visits conducted in a State party;
- Denounce
the impunity that prevails with regard to these violations, and urge States to
hold all those responsible to account;
- Increase its capacities to respond to urgent situations faced by human
rights defenders;
- Ensure the effective implementation of its resolutions, concluding
observations and decisions on communications in order that everyone, including
human rights defenders, be able to effectively enjoy all the rights and
freedoms recognised by the ACHPR, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders;
- Continue to strengthen the collaboration with the UN Special Rapporteur
on the Situation of Human Rights Defenders, as well as with the other regional
mechanisms dedicated to the protection of human rights defenders.
Thank you for your attention.
***
Niamey, May 2017
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The
objective of this programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression
against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders
Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
To contact the Observatory:
·      
Email: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·      
Tel and fax OMCT: + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22
809 49 29
·      
Tel and fax FIDH: + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1
43 55 18 80 