United Arab Emirates:  Joint statement: #FreeAhmed Mansoor immediately and without any conditions
December 21, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / United Arab Emirates / 2018 / DecemberUnited Arab Emirates: Joint statement: #FreeAhmed Mansoor immediately and without any conditions 
21-December-2018
 
Prominent human
rights defender Ahmed Mansoor has been held in solitary confinement in
Al-Wathba prison in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) since his arrest, according
to reliable sources. The first hearing of his appeal trial took place before the State Security Chamber of the Federal Supreme Court on 17 December
2018, and was adjourned to 24 December 2018. A lawyer has been appointed by the
court to represent Mansoor. We the undersigned human rights organisations, call
for his immediate and unconditional release. We are concerned that the date chosen, 24 December, indicates the UAE
authorities wish to avoid international attention. If Mansoor’s sentence is
upheld, the decision of the court is final and cannot be appealed.
 
Ahmed Mansoor, is the
laureate of the 2015 Martin Ennals Award for Human Rights Defenders, advisory board
member of the Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR) and the last human rights
defender to have been speaking out publicly defending people’s rights in the UAE
before his arrest last year.
 
Mansoor was arrested
by the UAE authorities on 20 March 2017 and essentially held incommunicado
since that date with only very infrequent family visits. He was sentenced on 29
May 2018, in the same court that will hear his appeal: the
State Security Chamber of the Federal Appeal Court in Abu Dhabi, which
sentenced him to ten years in
prison and fined him 1,000,000 Emirati Dirham (approximately USD
$270,000) for posts he made on social media. The trial lacked the minimum international standards for
fair trials and due process.
Mansoor was reported
to have been convicted of “publish[ing] false
information, rumours and lies about the UAE” which “would damage the UAE's
social harmony and unity.”
 
The European Parliament (EP) adopted a
resolution on 04 October 2018 condemning his imprisonment and calling for his
release.
 
The EP
resolution “Strongly condemns the harassment,
persecution and detention of Ahmed Mansoor as well as of all other human rights
defenders solely on the basis of their human rights work and their use of their
right to freedom of expression both online and offline;” and “Calls on the
authorities to release Mr Mansoor immediately and unconditionally, and to drop
all charges against him, as he is a prisoner of conscience detained solely for
peacefully exercising his right to freedom of expression, including through his
human rights work; also calls for the immediate and unconditional release of
all prisoners of conscience in the UAE and for all charges against them to be
dropped.”
 
The undersigned organisations are very concerned about the safety and well-being of Ahmed Mansoor and other
detained human rights defenders who have faced poor treatment, including being
held in arbitrary detention and solitary confinement for long periods of time
before being brought to trial, contrary to international human rights law.
 
Please
join us by asking your government, the UN and the EU to press the UAE
authorities to:
1.    
Immediately and unconditionally release Ahmed
Mansoor as he was arrested and detained solely for his peaceful human rights
activities; 
Allow
     international observers including local diplomatic representatives into
     the court on 24 December 2018 and to subsequent trial sessions;Allow
     UN and EU experts, or international NGOs access to visit Ahmed Mansoor, as
     well as other human rights defenders, who are detained in UAE prisons;Pending
     his release, ensure that Ahmed Mansoor is protected from torture and other
     ill-treatment, including prolonged and indefinite solitary confinement
     which can amount to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
     or punishment; andPending
     his release, ensure that Ahmed Mansoor is treated in line with the UN
     Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, including by giving
     him regular access to his family, as well as to any medical care he may require.
 
Join us!
Email your message or Tweet using the hashtag #FreeAhmed to the following:
 
UAE Authorities:
1.     Vice-President and Prime Minister HH Sheikh Mohammed Bin Rashid
Al-Maktoum, info@pmo.gov.ae / @HHShkMohd
2.     Minister of Interior Sheikh Saif bin Zayed Al Nahyan, moi@moi.gov.ae 
 
EU and UN representatives:
1.     European Parliament Chair of the Subcommittee on Human Rights Pier
Antonio Panzeri, @AntonioPanzeri
2.     UN Special Rapporteur on Human Rights Michel Forst, @ForstMichel 
 
 
 
 
Foreign countries with diplomatic
representatives in the UAE:
1.    
United States State Department, @StateDept
2.    
United Kingdom Foreign & Commonwealth
Office, Human Rights &
Democracy department, @FCOHumanRights
3.    
Canada Foreign policy, @CanadaFP
4.    
French Ministry for Europe and Foreign
Affairs, @francediplo_EN
5.    
Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs @DutchMFA
 
Signed:
CIVICUS
FIDH, within the framework of the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR)
Martin Ennals Foundation
Rights Realization Centre
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT),
within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders 