Thailand:  Somyot Phrueksakasemsuk’s sentence reduced, injustice continues
February 23, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2017 / FebruaryThailand: Somyot Phrueksakasemsuk’s sentence reduced, injustice continues





Paris-Geneva,
February 23, 2017: Today’s decision by Thailand’s Supreme Court to reduce the
prison sentence of human rights defender Somyot Phrueksakasemsuk does little to
mitigate the prolonged injustice Somyot and his family have endured, the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (an FIDH-OMCT
partnership) said. The Observatory reiterates its call for Somyot’s immediate
and unconditional release.
 
Today,
the Supreme Court reduced the sentence of activist Somyot from 10 to
six years. Somyot has been in jail since April 30, 2011, and was convicted in January
2013 on charges of lèse-majesté under Article 112 of Thailand’s Criminal Code[1]
for allowing the publication of two satirical articles in the now-defunct
magazine Voice of Taksin, of which he
was the editor. The articles were authored by a third party and deemed by Thai
authorities to have insulted the late King Bhumibol Adulyadej.
 
“The Supreme
Court’s decision to reduce Somyot’s jail sentence is too little, too late.
Despite displaying a façade of compassion, the court should have made a just
decision and acquitted Somyot of a crime he did not commit,”
said FIDH President Dimitris Christopoulos.
 
Somyot,
55, is currently the longest-serving lèse-majesté detainee. He remains
incarcerated in the Bangkok Remand Prison, and will now have to serve the
remaining two months and five days of his sentence, in addition to one more
year, which stemmed from an earlier sentence for defamation in another case.
The court justified the sentence reduction in consideration of Somyot’s age,
the fact that he did not write the articles with lèse-majesté content, and the
lengthy amount of time he had already spent in prison.
 
“We deplore today’s harsh sentence of Somyot,
who should have never spent a day in jail under a draconian law that curtails
freedom of opinion and expression. He should be released immediately and
unconditionally,” said OMCT Secretary General Gerald
Staberock.
 
Background information
 
A
former labour rights activist and magazine editor, Somyot Phrueksakasemsuk was
arrested on April 30, 2011, five days after he launched a petition campaign to
collect 10,000 signatures required for a parliamentary review of Article 112 of
the Criminal Code. 
 
Several
United Nations (UN) human rights monitoring bodies have voiced concern over
Somyot’s deprivation of liberty. In an opinion issued on August 30, 2012, the
UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD) affirmed that Somyot’s detention
was arbitrary, and called on Thai authorities to release Somyot and award him
adequate compensation.
 
On
January 23, 2013, the Bangkok Criminal Court sentenced him to 10 years in
prison on two counts of lèse-majesté.
 
On
September 19, 2014, the Court of Appeals upheld the Bangkok Criminal Court’s
lèse-majesté conviction of Somyot. The Court of Appeals failed to notify
Somyot, his lawyer, and his family that the hearing would take place on that
day. On November 19, 2014, Somyot filed an appeal to the Supreme Court against
his conviction. Somyot unsuccessfully petitioned for bail 16 times - the last
time being in November 2014.
 
Somyot’s
conviction and detention do not comply with Thailand’s international legal
obligations. Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights (ICCPR), to which Thailand is a State party, states that everyone has
the right to freedom of expression. This right includes “freedom to seek,
receive, and impart information and ideas of all kinds.”
 
In
its General Comment on Article 19, the UN Human Rights Committee (CCPR), the
body that monitors state parties’ compliance with the provisions of the ICCPR,
affirmed that, “all public figures, including those exercising the highest
political authority such as heads of state and government, are legitimately
subject to criticism and political opposition.” The CCPR specifically expressed
concern regarding lèse-majesté laws and stated that “imprisonment is never an
appropriate penalty” for defamation.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
For
more information, please contact:- FIDH: Audrey Couprie:
     +33143551412- OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41228094939



[1] Article 112 of the Criminal Code
states that “whoever defames, insults or threatens the King, the Queen, the
Heir to the throne or the Regent shall be punished with imprisonment of three
to 15 years.” 