Bahrain:  Arbitrary arrest and detention of Nabeel Rajab
June  8, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2012 / JuneBahrain: Arbitrary arrest and detention of Nabeel Rajab

URGENT APPEAL -
THE OBSERVATORY

 
New
Information
BHR
001 / 0512 / OBS 048.1
Arbitrary arrest and detention / Judicial harassment
Bahrain
June 8, 2012
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
Bahrain.
 
New
information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about
the arbitrary arrest of Mr. Nabeel
Rajab,
President of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR), Director of the Gulf
Centre for Human Rights (GCHR) and FIDH Deputy Secretary General[1].
 
According to the information received, on June 6, 2012, Mr.
Nabeel Rajab was summoned by the Public Prosecutor, on June 2, 2012, after he
tweeted the following: "Khalifa[2],
leave the residents of Al Mahraq, its Sheikhs and its elderly. Everyone knows
that you are not popular here, and if there wasn't a need for money, they
wouldn't have gone out to receive you. When will you step down?"
 
On June 6, 2012, he was questioned at the Public
Prosecution Office about these allegations and the Prosecutor ordered a
seven-day imprisonment pending further investigation. Mr. Rajab was charged
with “insulting in public” in accordance with Article 92 (1), (3) and 365 (1)
of the Bahraini Penal Code. His lawyer requested his release on bail but the
prosecution refused without giving any proper argument. After the seven- day
imprisonment, he will be presented before the judge who will either release him
or put him back in detention. No hearing has been scheduled yet.
 
This arbitrary detention seems to merely aim at curtailing
Mr. Rajab's freedom of expression and at stifling his attempts to fight
corruption in Bahrain. The Observatory recalls that according to international
standards pre-trial detention should only be used where other measures of
restraint are not possible.
 
The Observatory urges the Bahraini authorities to put an end
to the harassment – including at the judicial level – against Mr. Rajab, and to
comply with the relevant international norms and standards, in particular the
United Nations (UN) Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN
General Assembly on December 9, 1998, and international human rights standards
and international instruments ratified by Bahrain.
 
The Observatory recalls that these events occur in the
context of an intensified crackdown against activists, including human rights
defenders, who have supported, or are alleged to have supported, the protest
movement which started in Bahrain in February 2011.
 
Background
information: 
 
On May 5, 2012, Mr. Nabeel Rajab was arrested by plain
clothes police officers upon arrival at Manama airport from Lebanon and
transferred to Al Hawra police station. The police officers who carried out the
arrest stated that it had been ordered by Public Prosecution, however neither
Mr. Rajab nor his lawyers were at the time informed of the reasons for his arrest.

 
The following day, Mr. Rajab was taken to court were he
faced charges of “participating in an illegal assembly” and “calling others to
join”, in relation to a protest organised on March 31, 2012 in Manama to
denounce the detention of human rights defender Abdulhadi Al Khawaja, founder of GCHR, former President of the Bahrain Centre
for Human Rights (BCHR), and former MENA Director at Front Line. Mr. Rajab
denied the charges. The trial was postponed to May 22, 2012.
 
Later,
the same day, Mr. Rajab was presented before the Public Prosecutor who informed
him of the reasons for his arrest. According to Mr. Rajab's lawyers, charges of
“insulting the statutory bodies”, pursuant to Article 216 of the Penal Code,
which carry a term of imprisonment of up to three years and a fine, are pressed
against him in relation to tweets he posted deemed “insulting” to the Ministry
of Interior. Mr. Rajab stated that he was the author of tweets posted through
his account but that he did not recognise the jurisdiction of the Court and the
Prosecution given their lack of independence from the Executive. The Public
Prosecutor remanded Mr. Rajab to detention for seven days.
 
On May 28, 2012, Mr. Rajab was released on bail after spending three weeks in detention. The three different sets of
charges against him (“illegal gathering”, “calling others to gather” and
“defaming the government” via twitter) have not yet been dropped, and he is
banned from travelling.
 
Mr. Rajab is scheduled to appear before court on June 17,
2012, for the two cases in which he is charged with “illegal gathering” and “disturbing
public order”, and again on June 24, 2012 in
another case in which he is charged with “insulting statutory bodies.”
 
Actions
requested: 

The Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to: 
 
Guarantee the physical and
     psychological integrity of Mr. Nabeel Rajab and all human rights defenders
     in Bahrain; 
 
Release Mr. Nabeel Rajab
     immediately and unconditionally as his detention seems to merely sanction
     his human rights activities and is contrary to national and international
     law;
 
Put an end to any act of
     harassment, including at the judicial level, against Mr. Nabeel Rajab and
     against all human rights defenders in Bahrain; 

Conform
     in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human
     Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations
     General Assembly, in particular: 
     its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually or
     in association with others, to promote the protection and realization of
     human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international
     levels” ;
-         
its Article 6 (c) which
states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others to study, discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law
and in practice, of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through
these and other appropriate means, to draw public attention to those
matters” ;
-         
and its Article 12.2
which states that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
present Declaration”.
 
vi.    Ensure in all circumstances
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with
international human rights standards and international instruments ratified by
Bahrain. 


Addresses: 
·        
Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of Bahrain,
Fax: +973 176 64 587
·        
Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of
Foreign Affairs, Tel: +973 172 27 555; Fax : +973 172 12 6032 
·        
Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice
and Islamic Affairs, Tel: +973 175 31 333; Fax: +973 175 31 284 
·        
Lt. Gen. Cheikh Rashed bin Abdulla AL KHALIFA,
Minister of Interior, Tel: +973 17572222 and +973
17390000.
Email: info@interior.gov.bh
·        
Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the United Nations in
Geneva, 1 chemin Jacques-Attenville, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, CP 39, 1292 Chambésy,
Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch 
 
Please also write to diplomatic
representations of Bahrain in your respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, June 8, 2012 
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human
Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.

 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·        
Tel and fax FIDH + 33
(0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
Tel and fax OMCT +
     41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1]               Mr. Rajab
is also a member of the Advisory Committee of Human Rights Watch's Middle East
Division and Chair of CARAM Asia. 


[2]               Referring to Khalifa ibn Sulman al-Khalifa, Prime Minister of Bahrain. 