Turkey:  Seven human rights defenders remain arbitrarily detained and the two others released keep being judicially harassed
August 12, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2017 / AugustTurkey: Seven human rights defenders remain arbitrarily detained and the two others released keep being judicially harassed
URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY   New information
TUR 005 / 0717 / OBS 078.4
Arbitrary detention /
 Judicial harassment /
Turkey
August 11, 2017
 The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Turkey.
New
information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing arbitrary
detention of Ms. Nalan Erkem, lawyer
with the Citizens’ Assembly[1]
and Ms. İlknur Üstün, member of
the Women’s Coalition, Mr. Veli Acu, member of the Human Rights Agenda
Association, Ms. Idil Eser,
Director of Amnesty International Turkey, Ms. Özlem Dalkıran, member of the Citizens’ Assembly, Mr. Günal Kurşun, former Chairperson
and lawyer with the Human Rights Agenda Association, Mr. Ali Gharawi and
Mr. Peter Steudtner, security consultants as well as of the
ongoing judicial harassment of Mr.
Nejat Taştan, member of the Association for Monitoring Equal Rights and Mr.
Şeyhmus Özbekli, trainee lawyer and member of the Rights Initiative.

 
According to the information received, respectively on July 18, 2017, Mr.
Veli Acu and Mr. Günal Kurşun, on July 31, 2017, Ms. Idil Eser, Ms. Özlem Dalkıran
and Ms. Nalan Erkem , and on August 1, 2017 Mr. Ali Gharawi and Mr. Peter
Steudtner were transferred to Silivri prison in Istanbul, while Ms. İlknur
Üstün remains detained in Ankara’s Sincan prison.
 
Messrs. Veli Acu and Günal Kurşun have been held in solitary confinement
and a petition to share a cell was initially denied by Silivri Prison
Administration for security reasons. However, at the time of publication of
this Appeal, Mr. Günal Kurşun is no longer detained in solitary confinement. 
 
Ms. Idil Eser, who does not have first degree family members, is only
allowed to receive visits from her lawyers. Messrs. Ali Gharawi and Peter
Steundtner, who were detained in solitary confinement for 3 days, are only
allowed weekly one-hour visits from their lawyers.
 
In addition, on August 1, 2017, the Criminal Peace Judgeship in Istanbul
refused to release Mr. Ali Gharavi, Mr. Peter Steudtner, Mr. Günal Kurşun, Mr.
Veli Acu, Ms. Özlem Dalkıran, and Ms. İdil Eser. A court will again review the
remand into detention on August 18, 2017. Likewise, on August 9, 2017, the same
court denied an objection to release of Ms. İlknur Üstün and Ms. Nalan Erkem
and ordered the continuation of their pre-trial detention.
 
The Observatory recalls that the eight human rights defenders were
arrested on July 5, 2017 in Büyükada, Istanbul and are facing charges for “committing
a crime in the name of a terrorist organisation without being a member” (see
background information). They are remanded in detention pending trial.
 
The Observatory condemns the ongoing arbitrary detention and the
subsequent deterioration of detention conditions of Mr. Veli Acu, Ms. Idil
Eser, Ms. Özlem Dalkıran, Mr. Günal Kurşun, Mr. Ali Gharawi, Mr. Peter
Steudtner, Ms. Nalan Erkem, Ms. İlknur Üstün as well as the judicial harassment
targeting Mr. Nejat Taştan and Mr. Şeyhmus Özbekli, which only aims at
silencing their peaceful and legitimate human rights activities, in the context
of an ongoing crackdown against human rights defenders in Turkey[2].

The Observatory urges Turkish authorities to immediately and unconditionally
release Mr. Veli Acu, Ms. Idil Eser, Ms. Özlem Dalkıran, Mr. Günal Kurşun, Mr.
Ali Gharawi, Mr. Peter Steudtner, Ms. Nalan Erkem, Ms. İlknur Üstün and to put
an end to all form of harassment against the latter as well as Mr. Nejat Taştan
and Mr. Şeyhmus Özbekli.
 
Background
information:
 
On July 5, 2017, Nalan Erkem, Özlem Dalkıran, İlknur Üstün, Idil Eser, Günal Kurşun, Veli Acu, Nejat
Taştan, Şeyhmus Özbekli, Ali Gharawi and Peter Steudtner were arrested and
detained in different police stations across Büyükada, following a police raid
during a digital security and information management workshop organised by the
Citizens Assembly in Büyükada, Istanbul. The owner of the hotel where the
workshop was being organised was also arrested and released on July 6, 2017.
 
Under
Turkey’s state of emergency, they were not given access to their lawyers and
family for at least 24 hours. On July
6, 2017, after 24 hours, their detention was extended for seven days. 
 
On July 7, 2017, the ten human rights defenders where transferred to
Istanbul Directorate of Security on Vatan Street.
 
During a health control in Büyükada police stations Mr. Günal Kurşun and
Mr. Veli Acu reported that they were handcuffed and that the doctor in charge
did not properly examine them, in violation of the United Nations Standard Minimum
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules[3]).
 
On July 10 and 11, 2017, Nalan Erkem, Özlem Dalkıran, İlknur Üstün, Idil Eser, Günal Kurşun, Veli Acu, Nejat
Taştan and Şeyhmus Özbekli’s houses were raided and searched by the police, who
seized electronic equipment including flash disks, external disks, CDs and sim
cards. According to search warrants, the police were looking for evidence to
substantiate the Prosecutor’s allegation of “meeting with a suspicion of
terrorist activity”. However, due to the confidentiality of the investigation
neither copy of search warrants nor of seized materials were given to their
lawyers. Furthermore, some searches took place without the presence of lawyers.
Ms. Nalan Erkem’s apartment search was postponed until a representative of
Istanbul Bar Association was able to assist, the next morning. Likewise, Mr.
Nejat Taştan was briefly taken out of custody to open the door of his apartment
in order to allow police search. Despite his objection, they carried out the
search without the presence of a lawyer.
 
On July 11, 2017 Istanbul’s Terror and Organised Crime Investigation
Bureau’s Prosecutor extended the pre-trial detention period of the ten human
rights defenders for seven more days to complete his investigation. The
Prosecutor also ordered the confidentiality of the investigation, thus
preventing lawyers to access the files.
 
On July 18, 2017, the Public Prosecutor at Çağlayan Court House formally
charged the ten human rights defenders on charges of “committing a crime in the
name of a terrorist organisation without being a member”. However, neither the
Prosecutor nor the Judge have referred to any specific organisation nor to any
criminal provision. Moreover, the investigation remains confidential and
lawyers cannot access their clients’ files.
 
Despite the request of the Prosecutor to indict and place in pre-trial
detention all ten human rights defenders on July 17, 2017, the Court ordered
the release on judicial control of Ms. Nalan Erkem, Ms. İlknur Üstün, Mr. Nejat
Taştan and Mr. Şeyhmus Özbekli, who must show up to the police station three
times a week. They have also been imposed a ban on travels abroad.
 
On July 21, 2017, the Public Prosecutor at Çağlayan Court House ordered
the re-arrest of Ms. Nalan Erkem, Ms. İlknur Üstün, Mr. Nejat Taştan and Mr.
Şeyhmus Özbekli, who had been released on judicial control on July 17, 2017.
 
On July 21, 2017, Ms. Nalan Erkem was arrested at her house and taken to
Vatan Security Directorate before being presented to Çağlayan Court House. She
is now being detained at the Bakırköy prison for women.
 
On July 22, 2017, Ms. İlknur Üstün was arrested at his home in Ankara and
detained at the anti-terror branch in Ankara before being presented to Ankara
Court House and further detained at Ankara’s Sincan prison. She is expected to
be transferred to Istanbul. According to the arrest warrant presented, Ms.
Üstün was arrested under articles 220.6 and 312.2/3 of the Turkish Criminal
Code, although she had previously been charged under article 220.7 of the
Turkish Penal Code for allegedly “committing a crime in the name of a terrorist
organisation”.
 
On July 24, 2017 afternoon, Mr. Nejat Taştan went to the Posecutor’s
office in Istanbul, and had to wait until 3 am on July 25 at the İstanbul
Courthouse, which eventually ordered his release on judicial control[4].
 
On July 25, Mr. Şeyhmus Özbekli appeared at the Diyarbakır Court House,
where the Judge also ordered his release on judicial control. Both must show up
at the police station two times a week and a travel ban has been imposed on
them. 
 
The ten human rights defenders have more generally been the target of an
extensive smear campaign accusing them of “planning to fuel unrest across
Turkey” in certain segments of Turkish media.
 
On July 14, 2017, UN human rights experts Ms. Annalisa Ciampi,
Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful
assembly and association, Mr.
Michel Forst, Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights defenders, Mr. José
Antonio Guevara Bermúdez, current Chair-Rapporteur of the Working
Group on Arbitrary Detention, and Mr. Diego
García-Sayán, Special Rapporteur on the independence
of judges and lawyers, publicly called for the
release of the ten defenders[5].
 
Actions
requested: 
 
Please write to the
authorities in Turkey, urging them to:
 
i. Guarantee, in all circumstances,
the physical and psychological integrity of Veli Acu, Idil Eser, Özlem Dalkıran, Günal Kurşun, Ali Gharawi,
Peter Steudtner, Nalan Erkem,
İlknur Üstün, Nejat Taştan and Şeyhmus Özbekli as well as of all human
rights defenders in Turkey;
 
ii. Immediately and unconditionally
release Veli Acu, Idil
Eser, Özlem Dalkıran, Günal Kurşun, Ali Gharawi, Peter
Steudtner, Nalan Erkem and İlknur Üstün as their detention is arbitrary since it only
aims at punishing them for their legitimate human rights activities; 
 
iii. Put an end to all acts of
harassment, including at the judicial level, against Veli Acu, Idil Eser, Özlem Dalkıran, Günal Kurşun, Ali Gharawi,
Peter Steudtner, Nalan Erkem, İlknur Üstün, Nejat Taştan and Şeyhmus Özbekli, so that they
are able to carry out their legitimate activities without hindrance and fear of
reprisals;
 
iv. Comply with all the provisions
of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN
General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular its Articles 1, 6(a), 9, 11
and 12.2;
 
v. Ensure in all circumstances
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with
international human rights standards and international instruments ratified by
Turkey.
 
Addresses:
 
·     President of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Fax: (+90 312) 525 58 31
·     Prime Minister of Turkey
Binali Yıldırım, Fax: +90 (312) 403 62 82 Email: ozelkalem@basbakanlik.gov.tr 
·     Minister of Justice, Mr. Bekir Bozdağ, Fax: +90 (0312) 419 33 70; E-mail:
ozelkalem@adalet.gov.tr
·     Minister of Interior, Mr. Süleyman Soylu; Fax: +90 (312) 425 61 30
·     Ambassador Izzet Selim
Yenel, Diplomatic Mission of Turkey to the European Union in Brussels, Belgium;
Fax: + 32 2 511 04 50
·     Ambassador Mr. Ali Naci
Koru, Permanent Mission of Turkey to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland,
Fax: +41 22 734 08 59; Email: mission.turkey@ties.itu.int
 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Turkey in your
respective country.
 
***
 
Paris-Geneva,
August 11, 2017
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this
programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against
human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union
Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·       E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·       Tel and fax FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·       Tel and fax OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
 
 
 



[1]                 The Helsinki Citizens’ Assembly is an NGO dedicated
to peace, democracy and human rights in Europe, working on the notions of
fundamental rights and freedoms, peace, democracy and pluralism.


[2]                 Countless human rights defenders have been arrested
since the 2016 failed coup. Among them, Mr. Taner Kılıç, chair
founding member of Amnesty International Turkey remains in detention following
his arrest on June 6, 2017. See the Observatory’s Urgent Appeal TUR 003 / 0617 / OBS 064 published on
June 16, 2017.


[3]                 http://www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/70/175 


[4]                The Observatory underlines that Mr. Nejat Taştan
is a disabled person at 52%, which means that he needs careful treatment and
therefore his conditions could only worsen in detention.


[5]                 See OHCHR Statement, July
14, 2017: 
                  http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=21875&LangID=E 