Russian Federation:  Human rights defenders threatened and intimidated
June  6, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2012 / JuneRussian Federation: Human rights defenders threatened and intimidated

URGENT APPEAL -
THE OBSERVATORY

 
RUS
007 / 0612 / OBS 054
Threats / Intimidation
Russian
Federation
June 6, 2012
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in the Russian
Federation.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by the Committee Against Torture (CAT) about
threats and intimidation against the Joint Mobile Group (JMG) of Russian
organisations[1], and in particular against its head, Mr. Dmitry Utukin, and
against CAT international law expert, Mr. Roemer Lemaitre. 
 
 
According
to the information received, a picket organised by
the human rights NGO “Materinskaya Trevoga” (Mother’s Anxiety) to denounce the
enforced disappearances in Chechnya took place on June 1, 2012 in Grozny, the
capital of the Chechen Republic. Human rights defenders, relatives of the
disappeared and JMG lawyers attended the picket. The head of the Chechen
President’s Office, Mr. Magomed Daudov, as well as the Mayor of Grozny, Mr.
Muslim Khuchiyev, were also present.
 
Mr. Daudov requested Mr. Lemaitre to state the reasons
for his presence in Chechnya. After explaining that he was
investigating cases of abductions by state agents, he was advised by Mr. Daudov
to “return to Belgium to set apart men kissing each others right in the
streets”. Several human rights defenders attending the picket were subsequently
invited by Mr. Khuchiyev and Mr. Daudov to an impromptu meeting at the Mayor’s
Office, where they were joined by Mr. Ramzan Kadyrov, the Chechen President,
Mr. Viktor Ledenyov, Head of the Chechen Investigative Administration, Mr.
Mikhail Savchin, Chechen Prosecutor, Mr. Ruslan Alkhanov, Chechen Interior
Minister, and other high-ranking officials. 
 
During the meeting, Mr. Kadyrov strongly criticised
human rights organisations in general, and the Committee Against Torture in
particular. Referring to Mr. Lemaitre, the Chechen President accused “them” of
having “unleashed the war” and lashed out at the JMG members for “hating” the
Chechens and for “not want[ing] to put an end to lawlessness”. He asked the
human rights defenders present in the meeting if they were going to “help [him]
or only (…) shaitans [i.e. devils] and their aides who must be destroyed?”.
 
Attempting to discredit human rights organisations in
front of the mothers of the disappeared, Mr. Kadyrov voiced strong criticism of
JMG members. “Human rights defenders are not interested in you, human rights
organisations are not working”, he said referring to the relatives of the
disappeared. Mr. Daudov, for his part, accused JMG of bribing Chechens in
exchange for false allegations of torture, and criticised CAT for having
represented a defendant in a case of alleged attempt on his life in August
2009. For Mr. Viktor
Ledenyov, there was “no good from JMG’s activities, it just [makes] things
worse. The JMG [is] interfering with the investigations, making various
departments quarrel.” As for Mr. Ruslan
Alkhanov, he stated that the JMG was lacking the required jurisdiction to
engage in investigations.
 
The Observatory recalls that JMG lawyers have
repeatedly faced procedural violations committed by officials at different
level. 
 
More
generally, the Observatory emphasises that these incidents of intimidation and
veiled threats are not isolated but fall into a very worrying pattern of continuing
and threatening rhetoric that paves the way for acts of violence against human
rights defenders in the whole country.  
 
The
Observatory expresses its deep concerns about the total lack of recognition demonstrated
by the authorities, both at the level of the Republic and the Federation, for
the fundamental role played by human rights defenders in the Chechen Republic
in promoting and protecting fundamental rights and freedoms, and the rule of
law. The Observatory is extremely worried that far from fulfilling their duty
to protect human rights organisations and their staff, the authorities have on
the contrary intimidated, harassed and threatened them in an attempt to
discredit and discourage them from carrying out their work.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of the Russian
Federation, urging them to: 
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
of Messrs. Dmitry Utukin and Roemer Lemaitre, as well as other JMG and CAT staff members, and of all human rights
defenders in the Russian Federation, particularly in the Chechen Republic;
 
ii.Put an end to any threat and harassment against Messrs. Dmitry Utukin
and Roemer Lemaitre, as well as JMG and CAT staff members, and all human rights defenders,
and ensure that they are able to carry out their legitimate activities without
any hindrance and fear of reprisals; 
 
iii. Comply with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998,
especially:
-         
its Article 1, which
states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”,
-         
and Article 12.2, which
provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
present Declaration”; 
 
iv. Comply with the provisions of the Declaration of the Committee of
Ministers of the Council of Europe on the protection of human rights defenders
and the promotion of their activities, and in particular with Article 2.i), in
which the Committee calls on member States to “create an environment conducive
to the work of human rights defenders, enabling individuals, groups and
associations to freely carry out activities, on a legal basis, consistent with
international standards, to promote and strive for the protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms without any restrictions other than those
authorised by the European Convention on Human Rights;
 
v. More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments
ratified by the Russian Federation.  
 
Addresses:  


·        
Mr. Vladimir Putin,
President of the Russian Federation, Ilinka Str, 23, Moscow, 103132, Moscow,
Russian Federation, Faxes:+ 7 495 606 5173 / 630
2408
·        
Mr. Vladimir Kolokoltsev,
Minister of the Interior, Ulitsa Zhitnaya, 16, 117049 Moscow, Russian
Federation, Telegram: Rossiia, 117049, Moskva, Fax: + 7 495 637 49 25
·        
Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Smolenskaya-Sennaya pl, 32/34, 121200 Moscow,
Russian Federation, Telegram: Fax:+ 7 495 644 2203
·        
Mr. Alexander
Gennadievich Khloponin, Representative of the President in North Caucasus
federal region, Tel: +7793) 97-34-67
·        
Mr. Vladimir Lukin,
Ombudsman of the Russian Federation, Tel: +7 495 607-19-22
/ 607-34-67, E-mail:
press-sl@ropnet.ru
   
·        
Mr. Michail Fedotov,
Head of the Council under the President for development of civil society and
human rights, Tel: +7 495 606-41-84,Fax: +7 495 606-48-55; E-mail: president-sovet@mail.ru; fedotov_MA@gov.ru 
·        
Mr. Alexander Ivanovich
Bastrykin, Chairman of the Investigations Committee of the Russian Federation,
Building 28, house 15, Naberezhnaya Akademika Tupoleva, Moscow, 105005, Russia,
Tel: + 7 495 640 10 48
·        
H.E. Mr. Alexey
Borodavkin, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the
United Nations in Geneva, Avenue de la Paix 15, CH-1211, Geneva 20,
Switzerland, E-mail : mission.russian@vtxnet.ch, Fax: +41 22 734 40 44
·        
Ambassador Mr. Alexandra
Romanov, Embassy of the Russian Federation in Brussels, 66, avenue de Fre, Brussels, 1180 Brussels, Belgium. Fax: +32 2 374 26
13. E-mail: amrusbel@skynet.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic
mission or embassy of the Russian Federation in your respective country. 
 
***
Geneva-Paris, June 6, 2012 
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·        
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·        
Tel and fax FIDH + 33
(0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·       
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1]              
JMG, a group of representatives of various Russian human rights organisations,
has been working in Chechnya since 2009. Its mandate is to conduct
investigations of cases of torture and abductions that have taken place in the
Republic, and to represent the interests of individuals recognised as victims
in criminal proceedings. 