Angola:  Arrest of fourteen members of the Revolutionary Movement and of Mr. Domingos da Cruz
June 29, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Angola / 2015 / JuneAngola: Arrest of fourteen members of the Revolutionary Movement and of Mr. Domingos da CruzAGO 001 / 0615 / OBS 053Arbitrary detention / Judicial harassment /Ill-treatmentAngolaJune 29, 2015
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Angola.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the arrest of fourteen members of the Revolutionary Movement, a group of
youth activists advocating for democracy, political changes and human rights in
Angola, and of Mr. Domingos da Cruz, journalist.
 
According to the information received, on June 20,
2015, while members of the Revolutionary Movement were holding a meeting in
Luanda to discuss the human rights situation and bad governance prevailing in
Angola, police forces entered the place and arrested fourteen youth activists
from the organisation, namely Messrs. Luaty Beirão, Manuel Nito Alves,
Nuno Dala, Nelson Dibango, Alfonso Matias, Sedrick de
Carvalho, Nicolas Radical, Samussko Hitler, Arantes Kinuvu,
Valdemiro, Albano Bingo, Sheik Hata, Innocent Drux
and Osvaldo Caholo. Police forces also seized their personal belongings
without a warrant including computers, mobile phones, flash drives, diaries,
cameras and credit cards.
 
According to the same information, a warrant to
proceed to the search of the residence of the individuals under arrest and the
seizure of any potential evidence, was issued on June 22, 2015.
 
On the same day, following their arrest, the Director
General of the Criminal Investigative Service, issued a statement saying that
they are being accused of “preparing acts aimed at disrupting public order and
security in the country”. It was later reported that they are being charged
with “rebellion”, “attempted coup d'Etat” and “crimes against national
security”. 
 
Furthermore, on June 21, 2015, Mr. Domingos da Cruz,
was also arrested. Mr. da Cruz was initially supposed to take part in the
meeting as a speaker, but he finally did not attend the meeting.
 
It is reported that Messrs. Domingos da Cruz, Luaty Beirão and Manuel Nito Alves are detained at the
29th Police Station in Luanda, while the other activists arrested
are detained in police stations across Luanda. However, the whereabouts of
Messrs. Nicolas Radical, Arantes Kivuvu, Valdemiro, Sheik Hata, Innocent Drux
and Osvaldo Caholo remained unknown at the time of this appeal.
 
Allegations of physical and psychological torture as
well as death threats targeting the activists have also been reported. 
 
The Observatory is
greatly concerned by the arbitrary detention and allegations of ill-treatment
targeting fourteen members of the
Revolutionary Movement and Mr. Domingos da Cruz, which seem to merely
aim at sanctioning their human rights activities and calls upon the authorities
of Angola to immediately and unconditionally release all of them.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Angola
asking them to:
 
    i.        
Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Messrs. Domingos
da Cruz, Luaty Beirão, Manuel Nito Alves, Nuno Dala, Nelson Dibango, Alfonso
Matias, Sedrick de Carvalho, Nicolas Radical, Samussko Hitler, Arantes Kinuvu,
Valdemiro, Albano Bingo, Sheik Hata, Innocent Drux and Osvaldo Caholo, as well
as of all human rights defenders in Angola;
 
  ii.        
Immediately disclose the whereabouts of Messrs.
Nicolas Radical, Arantes Kivuvu, Valdemiro, Sheik Hata, Innocent Drux and
Osvaldo Caholo;
 
iii.        
Immediately and
unconditionally release Messrs.
Domingos da Cruz, Luaty Beirão, Manuel Nito Alves, Nuno Dala, Nelson Dibango,
Alfonso Matias, Sedrick de Carvalho, Nicolas Radical, Samussko Hitler, Arantes
Kinuvu, Valdemiro, Albano Bingo, Sheik Hata, Innocent Druxand Osvaldo
Caholo, as well as all human rights defenders
arbitrarily detained in Angola;
 
iv.        
Put
an end to all acts of harassment and intimidation, including at the judicial
level, against Messrs. Domingos da Cruz, Luaty Beirão, Manuel Nito
Alves, Nuno Dala, Nelson Dibango, Alfonso Matias, Sedrick de Carvalho, Nicolas
Radical, Samussko Hitler, Arantes Kinuvu, Valdemiro, Albano Bingo, Sheik Hata,
Innocent Drux and Osvaldo Caholo and all human rights defenders in Angola, and ensure in all circumstances
that they are able to carry out their work without unjustified hindrance and
fear of reprisal;
 
  v.        
Conform with the
provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the
General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially its
Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”, as well as its Article 12.2, which provides that the
State shall “take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the
competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others,
against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of his or her rights”;
 
Ensure in all circumstances
     respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international
     human rights standards and international instruments ratified by Angola.
 
Addresses:
 
·       H.E. José Eduardo dos Santos, President of the
Republic of Angola, Rua 17 de Setemro, Cidade Alta, Luanda República de Angola
 
·       H.E. Manuel Domingos Vicente, Vice-President of the
Republic of Angola, Rua 17 de Setemro, Cidade Alta, Luanda República de Angola
 
·       Mr. Ângelo de Barros Veiga Tavares, Minister of
Interior, Avenida 4 de Fevereiro n.º 106, Luanda República de Angola; Tel:
222390423
 
 
·       Mr. Rui Jorge Carneiro Mangueira, Minister of Justice
and Human Rights, Rua 17 de Setemro, Cidade Alta, Luanda República de Angola
 
·       H.E. Mr. Apolinário Jorge Correia,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Angola to the United Nations Office in Geneva,
Rue de Lausanne 45-47
CH-1201 Genève – Suisse, +41 22 732 30 60, E-mail: contact@mission-angola.ch
 
·       H.E. Elizabeth Simbrão, Ambassador, Embassy of Angola
in Brussels, Rue Franz Merjay 182 1050 Brussels, Belgium, Phone: (+32)
2.346.18.72 Fax: (+32) 2.344.08.94, Email: angola.embassy.brussels@skynet.be
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Angola in your respective
countries. 