Guatemala:  “Smaller than David”: the fight of human rights defenders in Guatemala. Publication of Fact-Finding Report and Documentary Film
February 23, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Reports and Publications / Guatemala / 2015 / FebruaryGuatemala: “Smaller than David”: the fight of human rights defenders in Guatemala. Publication of Fact-Finding Report and Documentary FilmGeneva-Paris-Guatemala-City, February 23, 2015: In its
report and documentary published today, the Observatory denounces the extreme
vulnerability of human rights defenders and their constant targeting via
criminalization campaigns, threats, and physical assaults. The publication of
the report and documentary coincides with the start of a 5-day mission in the
country.
                                                                                                         The Report is available for download on the OMCT website:
in Spanish: OBS_InformeCompleto_Guatemala_ES_20150223
in English: OBS_Guatemala_FullReport_English_20150223
The report reveals
657 cases of attacks against human rights defenders in 2013 and that in t2014
figures rose to 810 cases - the highest number since UDEFEGUA began keeping
official records in 2000. Additionally, last year saw the deaths of 7
defenders, 21 attempted murders, and the saddening figure of 30 cases of ill,
cruel or inhuman treatment against human rights defenders.
 
“The conclusions laid out in this report
place the utmost urgency on the Guatemalan authorities to truly commit to
protecting human rights defenders and to dealing with the structural sources of
social conflict. What
is more, the international community must deliver a more effective support
strategy for those who attempt to defend human rights in hostile environments
lacking adequate State protection”, stated Gerald
Staberock, Secretary General of the OMCT.
 
The report published today places the spotlight on the situation of land
rights defenders and the violence they experience when they raise their voices
against the negative impacts of natural resource extraction companies. Most
notably, the communities that have taken action in protecting human rights,
such as those of Santa Cruz Barillas, La Puya
or San Rafael de Las Flores and Mataquescuintla, have become the targets
of repressive political policies that have employed unjustifiable states of
siege and violent evictions. The most commonly witnessed attacks include:
harassment and threats, physical attacks including assassinations, criminal prosecution
and defamation.
 
“Despite a comprehensive legal and institutional framework and some
progresses regarding the fight against the impunity of attacks against
defenders, they continue to act under extremely vulnerable conditions. This
demonstrates the State’s  lack of
willingness and capacity when it comes to ensuring of the respect of their
rights, including their physicalsecurity”, said Karim Lahidji, FIDH President.
 
Land rights defenders face a critical
situation,aggravated by structural issues resulting in conflicts throughout the
country, such as the lack of agrarian reform as set forth in the Peace
Agreements; the re-militarization and the mishandling of social conflicts via
the application of laws that criminalize protesters such as the “Túmulos Law”; the structural
discrimination of indigenous peoples; inequality and poverty; and the
systematic violation of the right to prior consultation, which is considered to
be legally non-binding by the Constitutional Court.
 
“As stated by the International Labour
Organization, it is
important to remember that a lack of consultation mechanisms regarding
hydroelectric, extraction or monoculture projects that exploit natural
resources is in large part the source of said social conflicts”, stated Claudia Samayoa, Director of
UDEFEGUA.
 
The Observatory and UDEFEGUA have sent an international mission to
Guatemala from February 23 – 27, 2015 to launch the Report and the Documentary
Film, during which meetings will be held with local and international
authorities, civil society and the media. The objective of the mission is to
establish a dialogue on the conclusions and recommendations contained in the
report that was jointly drafted by the Observatory and the UDEFEGUA. 
 
 The Report is available for download on the OMCT website:
in Spanish: OBS_InformeCompleto_Guatemala_ES_20150223
in English: OBS_Guatemala_FullReport_English_20150223
The Documentary “Más pequeños que david” is available here:Original Version in Spanish: 



Subtitled in English:Subtitled in French:
You can participate
via social networking sites using the hashtag #MasPequeñosQueDavid.
 
 
For more information on the Report or Documentary,
please contact:
 
·        
OMCT: Miguel Martín
Zumalacárregui: + 41 22 809 49 24
·        
FIDH: Arthur Manet: +
33 1 43 55 25 18 / José Carlos Thissen: + 51 95 41 31 650
·        
UDEFEGUA: Claudia
Samayoa: +502 5018-4603
 
 
If you wish to arrange interviews with the mission
delegates during the mission, please contact:
 
·        
UDEFEGUA: Claudia
Samayoa: +502 5018-4603 