Belarus:  With the one year anniversary of the conviction of Ales Bialiatski, Human Rights Centre “Viasna” faces relentless harassment
November 23, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Belarus / 2012 / NovemberBelarus: With the one year anniversary of the conviction of Ales Bialiatski, Human Rights Centre “Viasna” faces relentless harassment


PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

 
BELARUS: With the one year anniversary of the
conviction of Ales Bialiatski, Human Rights Centre “Viasna” faces relentless
harassment
 
Paris-Geneva,
November 23, 2012 – One year after Ales Bialiatski's conviction, the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), remains gravely concerned about the arbitrary detention
of the prominent human rights defender and the continuous harassment targeting
members of the Human Rights Centre “Viasna” and other human rights defenders in
the country. 
 
One year ago, on November
24, 2011, the Minsk Pervomaiski District Court sentenced Mr. Ales Bialiatski, President of the Human
Rights Centre (HRC) “Viasna” and FIDH Vice-President, to four and a half years
of imprisonment. The conviction stated that he should serve his sentence under strict regime conditions, have his
property seized, including the premises used for Viasna’s offices in his name,
and have to pay a fine of 757,526,717 Belarusian Rubles (approximately 70,000
Euros). On January 24, 2012, the Minsk City Court confirmed the sentence on
appeal, and on February 28, 2012, Ales Bialiatski was transferred to Babruisk
Penal Colony No. 2. The Observatory recalls that Mr. Bialiatski was arrested on
August 4, 2011 by the police representative of the Department of Financial
Investigations, and charged, on blatantly biased grounds, with “concealment of
profits on an especially large scale”.
 
Since
then, he has been subjected to numerous arbitrary disciplinary sanctions by the
facility's administration including reduction in his monthly allowance and
suppression of visits and care packages. Meanwhile other detainees have been
forbidden to communicate with Mr. Bialiatski, thereby increasing the level of
isolation and psychological pressure put on him.
 
While
Mr. Bialiatski's conviction targeted his human rights' activities as well as more broadly
that of HRC “Viasna”, at the beginning of July 2012, the Partizanski Court of
Minsk City confirmed the seizure of its offices. On
November 17, Ms.
Natalia Pinchuk, Ales Bialiatski’s wife,
received an official notification informing her that “Viasna” would be evicted
from the offices on November 26, though it has occupied them for the past 12
years.
 
Once
more, the Observatory firmly denounces the ongoing harassment and arbitrary
detention of Ales Bialiatski, and is alarmed by the upcoming eviction of HRC “Viasna”, which has been providing crucial assistance
to victims of human rights violations for more than 16 years. It is clear that
these developments represent one step further in the relentless campaign of
slandering and harassment led by the Belarusian authorities against HRC “Viasna” for the past years. 
 
The
Observatory therefore urges the Belarusian authorities to immediately and
unconditionally release Mr. Bialiatski and to refrain from further harassments
of HRC  “Viasna”, as these acts clearly
aim at hampering and sanctioning their legitimate human rights activities.
 
More
generally, the Observatory reiterates its call to the authorities of Belarus to
put an end to the ongoing repressive climate targeting human rights defenders
and organisations in the country, in line with the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and international human rights instruments, all  ratified by Belarus.  
 
For more information,
please contact:
·       FIDH: Audrey Couprie / Arthur Manet: +33 1 43 55
25 18 
·     
OMCT:
Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39 