OMCT E-bulletin : 52nd session of the Committee against Torture - May 2014
June  5, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Reports and Publications / 2014 / JuneOMCT E-bulletin : 52nd session of the Committee against Torture - May 2014OMCT e-bulletin - May 20135 pages / 232 KB




 
 




OMCT E-bulletin - May
  2014
52nd session
  of the Committee against Torture 




 




During its 52nd session (28 April
  to 23 May 2014) the Committee against Torture considered the State reports submitted
  by the Holy See, Uruguay, Guinea, Cyprus, Lithuania, Montenegro, Sierra Leone
  and Thailand. 


E-bulletin Contents
Consideration of State reports
Adoption of List of Issues and
  LOIPR
General Comment on Article 3 of
  the CAT Convention
OMCT’s new
  initiative: mobilising civil society around CAT Committee 
Next Session


 




 




OMCT’s new initiative: mobilising civil society around CAT Committee




 
The 52nd
  session of the CAT Committee is the first session in which OMCT carried out
  its role as facilitator between the members of civil society and the experts
  of the CAT Committee. The purpose of this convening function is to mobilise
  and coordinate activities of civil society organisations (CSOs) and minimise
  gaps in alternative reporting to the Committee against Torture. In carrying
  out this role, OMCT aims to optimise the dialogue between the CAT Committee
  members and CSOs. With this new initiative OMCT provides more visibility to
  the CAT Committee and advocates for the implementation of the Convention
  against Torture and the Concluding Observations of the CAT Committee.
[Read
  more]




Consideration
  of State Reports




Holy
  See – Failure to prevent, stop, and punish child
  sexual abuse
The
  Committee expresses deep concern over the Holy See’s failure to prevent, stop,
  and sanction sexual abuse by Catholic clergy and calls on the Holy See to
  ensure that Holy See officials and other public officials of the Vatican
  State take effective measures to monitor the conduct of all individuals under
  their effective control and to stop and sanction such conduct when they
  become aware of credible allegations. [Read
  more]
Uruguay – Serious concern about cases of ill-treatment of children deprived
  of liberty
The CAT Committee
  is particularly alarmed by the situation of children in conflict with the law
  and deprived of liberty in Uruguay. It urges Uruguay to ensure that the
  juvenile justice system conforms to international standards. The CAT experts also
  express concern about the allegations of ill-treatment of children in
  detention centres run by the System of Criminal Liability for Adolescents
  (SIRPA) as well as about reprisals against the victims, their families and
  detention facilities officials who denounce such abuses. [Read
  more]
Guinea – Review of a non-reporting State 
For the
  first time since its establishment, the CAT Committee has decided to review a
  non-reporting State. After an almost 25-year delay Guinea was scheduled for
  examination. The state party responded by sending a delegation presenting
  finally its initial report on the very day of the scheduled examination. In
  its examination, the CAT Committee expresses regret at the absence of a
  specific provision in the law prohibiting torture and ill-treatment under any
  circumstances and urges Guinea to enact legislation to establish an absolute
  prohibition of torture and inhuman and degrading treatment and to ensure that
  establish torture is not subject to any statute of limitation. [Read
  more]
Cyprus – Deep concerns about deportation of asylum seekers despite serious
  risks of torture 
The
  treatment of asylum seekers in Cyprus has been discussed at length during the
  country examination. The Committee is particularly alarmed by reports
  indicating that asylum seekers have been deported to their countries of
  origin despite serious risk of torture and by the fact that they do not have
  access to legal aid at the first instance of the asylum process. [Read
  more]
Lithuania – Too little progress in the
  investigation into alleged involvement in the CIA rendition and secret
  detention programmes
The
  Committee addresses the issue of Lithuania’s alleged complicity in the CIA
  rendition and secret detention programmes and urges the State to complete the
  investigation and to ensure that its investigation process is transparent. [Read
  more]
Montenegro
  – Call for intensifying efforts to fight
  impunity for war crimes
The
  Committee is concerned that persons deprived of their liberty are not always
  afforded all fundamental legal safeguards, and calls on the State to ensure
  that all persons deprived of their liberty have the right to access an
  independent lawyer and an independent doctor, as well as to contact a
  relative from the outset of the deprivation of liberty. Another major focus
  of discussion is the climate of impunity surrounding war crimes. [Read
  more]
Sierra
  Leone – High prevalence of violence against women 
The
  Committee is concerned that, thirteen years after the ratification of the
  Convention, Sierra Leone has still not incorporated the Convention into the
  national legal system and it urges the State to enact legislation to give
  effect to the Convention in the domestic legal system. The Committee is raises
  the high prevalence of violence against women in the country, including
  domestic violence, sexual violence, female genital mutilation, child marriage,
  and lynching of elderly women accused of witchcraft and ritual murders. [Read
  more]
Thailand – Impunity for widespread acts of
  torture to be addressed as priority
The
  Committee recommends that the State promptly consider withdrawing its declarations
  regarding articles 1, 4 and 5 of the Convention, made at the time of
  accession, to ensure it is in compliance with the provisions of the
  Convention. The Committee further urges the State to adopt a definition of
  torture in line with article 1 of the Convention and to include torture as a
  separate and specific crime in its legislation. The Committee is seriously
  concerned about the on-going and continued allegations of the widespread use
  of torture and ill-treatment by security and military officials, notably in
  the Southern Border Provinces, to obtain confessions. [Read
  more]
 




Adoption
  of List of Issues and LOIPR 




 
The
  Committee has adopted LOIPR of
  Canada, the Czech Republic, Greece, Mexico, Norway, Peru and the Russian
  Federation. Together with Greek Helsinki
  Monitor, the Coordinated Organizations and Communities for Roma Human Rights
  in Greece and the Minority Rights Group Greece, OMCT submitted a report for the development of the LOIPR in respect of
  Greece’s periodic report.
 
The
  Committee has also adopted Lists of
  Issues of Burundi and Venezuela. COFAVIC
  and OMCT submitted a joint report to contribute to the List of Issues of the
  Venezuela’s periodic report.
 




General Comment on Article 3 of the CAT Convention




 
The Committee
  Against Torture has held its annual meeting with NGOs that wish to bring
  concerns and issues to the attention of the Committee members. During this
  year’s meeting, OMCT made available a paper inviting the Committee to draft a new General
  Comment on non-refoulement as enshrined in Article 3 of the Convention. This
  paper mainly sets out key areas of concern on which clarification and
  guidance by the Committee would be needed.
 




Next
  session




Consideration of
  State reports:



·     
    Australia
·     
    Burundi
·     
    Croatia
·     
    Kazakhstan
·     
    Serbia


·      Sweden
·      Ukraine
·      USA
·     
    Venezuela



The deadline for NGO submissions is 17 October 2014.
List of Issues prior
  to reporting (LOIPR) to be adopted:



·      Armenia
·      Gabon
·      Qatar


·      Senegal
·     
    Togo



The
  deadline for NGO submissions is 22 August 2014.
 




OMCT E-bulletin is realised with the financial aid of the European
  Commission. The views expressed in the document are solely those of OMCT and
  do not represent those of the European Commission. 