Kazakhstan:  Amnesty for human rights defender Evgeniy Zhovtis!
February  3, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kazakhstan / 2012 / FebruaryKazakhstan: Amnesty for human rights defender Evgeniy Zhovtis!

PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY
 
KAZAKHSTAN: Amnesty for human rights defender Evgeniy Zhovtis!
 
Paris-Geneva, February 3, 2012. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), welcomes the amnesty granted to Mr. Evgeniy 
Zhovtis, founding member and Director of the Kazakhstan International Bureau for 
Human Rights and the Rule of Law.
 
On February 1, 2012, a court in penal colony ОВ-156/13 of 
Ust-Kamenogorsk city decided to grant amnesty to Mr. Evgeniy Zhovtis, 
prominent Kazakh human rights defender and also a member of the Council of 
Experts of the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODHIR) under 
the Organisation on Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in charge of 
freedom of assembly. The latter should be released within 15 days after the 
entry into force of the decision.
 
Mr. Zhovtis has been detained since September 2009 for “traffic 
accident triggering death”. On April 26, 2010, the Supreme Court eventually 
rejected the appeal of his lawyer to initiate review proceedings declared by the 
observers as unfair. Mr. Zhovtis then decided not to make use of his possibility 
to independently appeal to the Supreme Court with a petition for the review of 
this sentence or to the Office of the Prosecutor General, considering that no 
independent review would be possible in the current 
context.
 
On July 1, 2010, Mr. Ales Bialiatski, FIDH Vice President and President of the Belarusian Human Rights 
Centre “Viasna” currently arbitrarily detained in Belarus, had visited Mr. 
Zhovtis in the penitentiary colony of Ust-Kamenogorsk, in north-east Kazakhstan, 
1,000 km away from his residence in Almaty. At the end of the mission, Mr. Ales 
Bialiatski had declared that “the detention of Evgeniy Zhovtis as well as the 
conditions he faced in that framework were preoccupying”. 

 
“The release of Evgeniy Zhovtis is a huge relief for the human 
rights community, and we are looking forward to have him again among us. We 
nonetheless regret the fact that he was detained for more than two years on the 
basis of unfair proceedings marred with a number of irregularities. Although the 
Amnesty decree was published a month ago, the decision on his case was taken 
only now, and even so, Evgeniy should again wait for two weeks more before 
finally being free”, FIDH President Souhayr Belhassen said 
today.
 
“This overdue decision is good news for Kazakhstan and for Central 
Asia. There is a dire need for voices like his to be heard loud and clearly if 
the human rights situation is to improve”, said OMCT Secretary General 
Gerald Staberock. “We hope that he is allowed to resume his work without 
hindrance and interference”.
 
The Observatory more generally urges the Kazakh authorities to put an 
end to all acts of harassment against human rights defenders and to conform to 
the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights and international human rights instruments ratified 
by Kazakhstan.
 
For further information, please contact:
·         FIDH: Karine Appy / Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18 
·         OMCT: 
Delphine Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 39 