Bangladesh:  Arbitrary arrest of Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan, Secretary of Odhikar and a member of OMCT General Assembly
August 10, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2013 / AugustBangladesh: Arbitrary arrest of Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan, Secretary of Odhikar and a member of OMCT General Assembly  
BGD 001 / 0813 / OBS 074
Arbitrary arrest
Bangladesh
August 10, 2013
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human
Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Bangladesh.
 
Description of the
situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed
by reliable sources of the arbitrary arrest of Mr. Adilur
Rahman Khan, Secretary of Odhikar, a member of OMCT
General Assembly and Executive Committee Member of Forum Asia, at his Gulshan
residence, in Dhaka.
 
According to the information received, on
August 10, 2013, at 10.20 pm, Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan was
arrested by eight or nine detectives of the Detective Branch of Police (DB) as
he was returning home with his family. The detectives, who brought a white
microbus apparently belonging to the United Commercial Bank and a blue and
silver coloured mitsubishi pajero, asked Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan to follow them.
Reportedly, Mr. Rahman Khan was brought to the headquarters of the police DB in
Dhaka.
 
The Dhaka Metropolitan Police subsequently confirmed the
arrest to the media, adding that Mr. Adilur
Rahman Khan has been arrested under the Information and Communication Technology
Act. The arrest was allegedly made on the basis
of a general diary filed by the police with Gulshan Police Station, in relation to the report prepared
by Odhikar about the killing of 61 people during an operation carried out on May 5, 2013 by
law enforcement agencies against Hifazat-e
Islam activists at the Dhaka’s downtown Motijheel area. Mr.
Adilur Rahman Khan has also been the Deputy Attorney General during
the erstwhile four-party alliance government.

The
Observatory expresses its deepest concern about Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan's arbitrary
arrest, which seem to merely aim at sanctioning his peaceful human rights
activities, and calls upon the authorities in
Bangladesh to guarantee in all circumstances his physical and psychological
integrity as well as to release him immediately and unconditionally.
 
Action requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Bangladesh, urging them
to:
 
i. Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and
psychological integrity of Mr. Adilur Rahman
Khan and of all human rights defenders in
Bangladesh;
 
ii. Release Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan immediately and unconditionally as his
detention is arbitrary since it only aims at sanctioning his human
rights activities; 
 
iii. Put an end to any kind of harassment - including
at the judicial level - against Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan and all human rights
defenders in Bangladesh;
 
iv. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations
on December 9, 1998, especially:
-       
its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right,
individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the
protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the
national and international levels”, as well as
-       
its Article 12.2, which provides that the State shall “take
all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence,
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise
of his or her rights”; 

v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards
and international instruments ratified by Bangladesh.
 
Addresses:
 
·     Ms. Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister, Office of the
Prime Minister, Gona Bhaban, Old Sangsad Bhaban, Tejgaon, Dhaka, Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 8113243, Email: info@pmo.gov.bd
·     Mr. Muhiuddin Khan Alamgir, Minister for Home
Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat Building 4, Dhaka,
Bangladesh, Email: mkalamgir@yahoo.com; minister@mha.gov.bd;
·     Barrister Shafique Ahmed, Minister for Law,
Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary
Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Email: info@minlaw.gov.bd
·     Mr. Hasan Mahmud Khandaker, Inspector General of
Police, Police Headquarters, Phoenix Road, Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh, Email :
ig@police.gov.bd 
·     H.E. Mr. Abdul Hannan, Ambassador, Permanent
Mission of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh to the United Nations in Geneva,
65 rue de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 46 16, E-mail: mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.int
·     Embassy of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
in Brussels, 29-31 rue J. Jordaens, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 646 59
98; Email: bdootbrussels@freegates.be
 
Please also write to the
diplomatic missions or embassies of Bangladesh in your respective country as well as to the EU diplomatic missions or
embassies in Bangladesh.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, August 10, 2013
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code
of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to
the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete
support in their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:

E-mail:
     Appeals@fidh-omct.orgTel and
fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29Tel and
fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 