HRDN Stand 4 Human Rights Defenders Campaign: Featured case: Damián Gallardo
September 21, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / European Union (EU) / 2016 / SeptemberHRDN Stand 4 Human Rights Defenders Campaign: Featured case: Damián GallardoHRDN_Damian_Gallardo_leaflet2 pages / 235 KB​The Human Rights and Democracy Network (HRDN), of which OMCT is a 
member, presents another case of a human rights defender, in the framework of its one year-long campaign: Stand 4 Human Rights Defenders. HRDN is an informal group of 48 NGOs operating at the EU level in the areas of human rights, democracy and peace building.
DESCRIPTION OF THE CASE


Damián Gallardo Martínez, an Ayuuk indigenous human rights defender and 
teacher from Oaxaca state in Mexico, who has worked to defend the rights
 of indigenous communities and the right to education, has been 
arbitrarily detained since May 2013.


His detention has been plagued with irregularities:
He was violently arrested in May 2013 without a warrant and held 
incommunicado for 30 hours during which he was tortured and forced to 
sign a false confession. He wasn’t informed about the charges he was 
facing and during several days following his arrest he was not allowed 
to communicate with his lawyer. 
The first medical examination wasn’t carried out in accordance with 
the Istanbul Protocol on the Effective Investigation and Documentation 
of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or 
Punishment.
During the detention he has been subjected to various acts of 
torture and ill treatment, including by the personnel of Jalisco maximum
 security prison CEFERESO No 2 where he is detained.
He has been denied adequate medical and psychological diagnosis and 
care, which has produced irreversible consequences on his health. 
The ongoing penal process he is facing could result in a sentence of 75 years of imprisonment.


Similar cases in Mexico: Between August 2014 and December 2015, the 
United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary detention (UN WGAD) issued 
five opinions considering that 5 Mexican HRDs (Damián Gallardo, Pedro 
Canché, Librado Baños, Enrique Guerrero and Nestora Salgado) had been 
subjected to arbitrary detention and penal proceedings plagued by 
irregularities. This is the highest number of opinions by the UNWGAD on a
 single country in such a period of time, which shows a pattern of 
arbitrary detentions of HRDs that seems to aim at rendering their human 
rights work impossible.


Reactions to the proceedings and sentence
In April 2014, four UN mandate holders requested urgent attention by the
 Mexican Government to the arbitrary detention and the allegations of 
torture of Damián Gallardo. 
In August 2014, the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention issued 
an opinion on Damián Gallardo, considering his arrest and detention to 
be arbitrary and linked to his work in defence of human rights, and 
called for his immediate and unconditional release.



WHAT MORE COULD THE EU DO? 

In the last 3 years, some MEPs have repeatedly expressed their concerns 
through public statements and written questions regarding the situation 
of human rights defenders in Mexico and they have asked the Commission 
and the HR/VP to take action regarding the increasing number of attacks,
 threats, stigmatization and criminalization of human rights defenders. 
Two written questions on Damián Gallardo Martínez’s case were submitted 
in 2014 and 2015 by MEPs. 
The EU Delegation in Mexico met with members of his family in 2014 and 2015. 
		


This mobilisation must continue to ensure that the Opinion of the UNWGAD
 is fully implemented so that Damián Gallardo is released and all 
charges against him are dropped.

You can act by:
Making public pronouncements (including via social media using the 
hashtag #FreeDamian) calling for the immediate and unconditional release
 of Damián Gallardo and highlighting the need for combating impunity to 
put an end to the pattern of arbitrary detention of HRDs in Mexico. Raising the issue during bilateral meetings with Mexican 
authorities (missions to the country, meetings with diplomats, Human 
Rights Dialogues…)Urging the Mexican authorities to investigate and prosecute those 
responsible for the torture and all the irregularities in the process 
against Damián Gallardo.Visiting Damián Gallardo in Jalisco’s maximal security prison CEFERESO No 2. Advocating for a stronger human rights-based cooperation to be 
included in the modernisation of the EU-Mexico Global Agreement, 
particularly with regards to the protection of human rights defenders.

Contact 
Miguel Martin Zumalacarregui, World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT).

 				The description of the case of Damián Gallardo can be found here.Website: www.stand4humanrightsdefenders.eu#Stand4HRDS 