Egypt:  Egypt: arbirary detention and  y torture of a civilian by o piléce official in Louxor
June 12, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2003 / JuneEgypt: Egypt: arbirary detention and  y torture of a civilian by o piléce official in LouxorCase EGY 110603 Arbitrary detention / Torture   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Egypt.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source of the arbitrary detention and torture of a civilian by a Luxor Traffic Unit police officer in Egypt.  According to the information received, on May 14, 2003, Nagdy Mohamed Gad El Rub was requesting information regarding the requirements for obtaining a tractor license when an officer's assistant asked him to present his identity card. After presenting his card, Mr. Gad El Rub was accompanied by the assistant to Major Magdy Awad of the Luxor Traffic Unit. Major Awad accused Mr. Gad El Rub of stealing 1,000 LE from a traffic unit employee. Mr. Gad El Rub denied the accusations despite threats of torture. Major Awad brought Mr. Gad El Rub to a room in one of the driving schools and, with the assistance of four officer's assistants, hanged him from his back. He was then beaten with canes, and boiling and frigid water was alternately poured on his body. Mr. Gad El Rub continued to deny the accusations. Major Awad called Mr. Gad El Rub's brother, Sidi Ahmed Mohamed Gad El Rub, and sister, Samah Mohamed Gad El Rub, to the office. One of the officer's assistants, at the Major's direction, proceeded to pull Ms. Gad El Rub's hair and place his hands on a private area of her body to force Mr. Gad El Rub's confession. Sidi Ahmed Mohamed Gad El Rub and Samah Mohamed Gad El Rub were eventually released.  Mr. Gad El Rub's torture continued for four consecutive days. When his condition became very serious, Major Awad arranged for a nurse to treat his injuries. On May 17, 2003, Mr. Gad El Rub was transferred to the Luxor Police Station where a misdemeanour report was filed against him and another man, Isaa Ali Mohamed. Mr. Gad El Rub was then brought to the Luxor Prosecution Office and informed that if he or his family reported the torture he would be tortured again. The officer's assistant who had participated in the torture accompanied Mr. Gad El Rub to the Prosecutor's Office where he met Major Awad, causing him to fear further reprisals. Mr. Gad EL Rub denied the accusations, and was detained for four days pending the investigation. At the Luxor Police Station his condition continued to deteriorate and the head of prosecution eventually ordered Mr. Gad EL Rub transported to the International Luxor Hospital Burn Unit.  A lawyer working for a local NGO reportedly observed burns covering various parts of Mr. Gad El Rub's body, particularly the groin and buttock areas. The lawyer submitted a report to the Attorney General and the State Security Department of Luxor, indicating the necessity of involving a forensic specialist. On June 5th, 2003, the prosecution ordered that a forensic specialist examine the detainee and report on the injuries and the cause of the injuries, and that Mr. Gad El Rub be transferred to a hospital to receive the appropriate medical care.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Gad El Rub, particularly as there are confirmed reports of him having already been subjected to torture and having received threats of further torture. OMCT calls on the Egyptian government to immediately release Mr. Gad El Rub in the absence of valid legal charges that are in line with international law, or, if such charges exist, to ensure that he receives a prompt and fair trial. OMCT calls on the Egyptian government to initiate an immediate and impartial investigation into the allegations of torture, in order to identify those responsible for these human rights violations and bring them to justice, to provide adequate reparation to Mr. Gad El Rub, including appropriate medical assistance.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Egypt urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Gad El Rub; ii.	order Mr. Gad El Rub’s immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges, or, if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times; iii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances  in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iv.	guarantee adequate reparation, including medical assistance as a matter of urgency; v.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	H.E. President Mohammad Hosni Mubarak, Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, Email: webmaster@presidency.gov.eg; Fax: + 202 390 1998 ·	H.E. Faruq Sayf al-Nasr, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, Midan Lazoghly, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 795 8103, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg ·	H.E. General Habib Ibrahim al-Adeli, Minister of the Interior, Al – Sheik Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: + 202 579 2031, e-mail: moi@idsc.gov ·	Counsellor Maher 'Abd al-Wahid, Public Prosecutor, Dar al-Qadha al-'Ali, Ramses Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: + 202 577 4716  Please also write to the embassies of Egypt in your respective country.  Geneva, June 11th, 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 