Congo, Democratic Republic:  Congo (DRC): Arbitrary detention of Mr. Khutino Fernando in CPRK
May 19, 2006
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Congo, Democratic Republic / 2006 / MayCongo, Democratic Republic: Congo (DRC): Arbitrary detention of Mr. Khutino Fernando in CPRKCase COD 170506.1 - Follow up to Case COD 170506Arbitrary detention / Risk of torture   Geneva, 19 May 2006  The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against torture (Organisation Mondiale Contre la Torture - OMCT) requests your Urgent intervention in the following situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). New InformationThe International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Committee of Human Rights Observers (Comité des observateurs des droits de l’homme - CODHO), member of the SOS-Torture network, of the illegal detention of Reverend Khutino Fernando in building 8 of the Makala prison in Kinshasa, known as the Penitentiary and Reeducation Center in Kinshasa (Centre pénitentiaire et de rééducation de Kinshasa - CPRK).   Mr. Khutino Fernando, kidnapped on 14 May 2006, was at first detained in a dungeon at the office of the Direction of General Intelligence and Security Services (Direction de renseignements généraux et de sécurité - DRGS) of the national police, located in the building named Kin-Mazière (municipality of Gombe in Kinshasa). The Reverend was then transferred to the CPRK, building 8, where he is still detained.  The International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its grave concern over the kidnapping and over the continuing risk of torture of Reverend Khutino Fernando, and calls on the Congolese government to launch a thorough and impartial investigation into these events. Brief reminder of the situationOn 14 May 2006, Reverend Khutino Fernando was kidnapped by members of the security police said to be from “Kin Maziere”, under the command of Colonel Raus, while he was at the office of his Church "Army of the victory" (Armée de la victoire), located in the municipality of Kasa-Vubu, after having participated in a religious service at the stadium “Tata Raphaël”, municipality of Kalamu. During his kidnapping, Mr. Khutino Fernando has been brutalised and was threatened with dead. He was furthermore undressed.  During the sermon that he had held in the stadium, Reverend Khutino Fernando called upon the main political actors to prevent a political crisis that might arise with the end of the transition that is planned for 30 June 2006. Indeed, according to the elections calendar that was issued by the independent electoral commission, the election should begin on 30 July 2006 and the transition will not end anymore on 30 June 2006 as scheduled by the constitution of transition.  In the evening of the same day, the governor of Kinshasa, Mr. Kimbembe Mazunga, accused on the public television channel RTNC (National Radio–Television of Congo - Radio-Télévision Nationale du Congo) Mr. Khutino of calling for, while preaching, hate and division. He also reported to have found weapons in the house of the Reverend.  Reverend Khutino Fernando came back from Europe only on 6 May 2006 after an exile of three years in France. He had fled the country in the same circumstances, because of death threats he received.  On 15 May 2006, a march was organised in Kinshasa by the followers of Reverend Khutino Fernando as well as by others who protested against his illegal arrest, as well as against ill-treatment, death treats and acts of violence against the followers of his church. The demonstrators, who were heading towards the cabinet of the vice-president of the Republic, Mr. Jean-Pierre Bemba Gombo, were violently dispersed by members of the national police, who used firearms as well as teargas. Several followers of Mr. Khutino Fernando would have been arrested. Action requestedPlease write to the Congolese authorities and ask them to: 1.	Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Kuthino Fernando; 2.	Order the immediate release of Mr. Kuthino Fernando in the absence of valid charges, or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times; 3.	Order a thorough and impartial investigation into these events, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and apply to them the civil, penal and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; 4.	Guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards. Addresses Le Président de la République, S.E. Joseph Kabila, Présidence de la République, Kinshasa-Ngaliema, République Démocratique du Congo, E-mail: upp@ic.cd   Le Vice-Président de la République en Charge de la Commission Politique, Défense et Sécurité, M. Azarias Ruberwa Manywa, Cabinet du Vice-Président de la République, avenue roi Baudouin ex-3Z, Kinshasa/Gombe, République Démocratique du Congo, Email :  vice_presidence.rdc@ic.cd  Le Ministre des Affaires Etrangères et de la Coopération Internationale, M. Ramazani Baya, Cabinet du Ministre, bâtiment du Ministère des Affaires Etrangères, Kinshasa/Gombe, République Démocratique du Congo  Le Ministre de la Justice et Garde des Sceaux, M. Kisimba Ngoy, Ministère de la Justice et Garde des Sceaux, BP 3137, Kinshasa Gombé, République Démocratique du Congo, E-mail: minjustrdc@yahoo.fr  Le Ministre de l’Intérieur, Ministère de l’Intérieur, Fax: +243 88 02 042, E-mail: mininterieur@yahoo.fr  La Ministre des Droits Humains, Mme Marie-Madeleine Kalala, Cabinet du Ministre, Boulevard du 30 juin, Kinshasa/Gombe, République Démocratique du Congo, Fax: 00 243 12 20 664, Email: min_droitshumains@yahoo.fr ou mindroits_humains@yahoo.fr  Observatoire National des Droits de l’Homme (ONDH), Cabinet du Président, avenue Sendwe, Kinshasa/Kalamu, République Démocratique du Congo, Tél: +243 98313740 / + 243 98271199 / + 243 98407633  M. Théo Kiakwima, Directeur adjoint de l’Agence Nationale des Renseignements, Tel : + 243 995 8610  Ambassadeur, Antoine Mindua Kesia-Mbe, Mission permanente de la République démocratique du Congo, Avenue de Budé 18, 1202 Genève, Suisse, e-mail : missionrdc@bluewin.ch, Fax : +4122 740.16.82  Ambassadeur, Mr. Jean-Pierre Mavungu, Ambassade de la République Démocratique du Congo à Bruxelles, Avenue Foestraets, 6, 1180 Bruxelles. Tel : + 32 2 375 47 96, Fax : + 32 2 372 23 48  Please also write to the diplomatic representations of the Democratic Republic of Congo in your respective countries.  *** Geneva, 19 May 2006  Kindly inform OMCT of any action undertaken quoting the code number of this appeal in your reply. 