Belarus:  Press Release: Trade Union leaders found guilty of tax evasion after a sham trial
August 24, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Belarus / 2018 / AugustBelarus: Press Release: Trade Union leaders found guilty of tax evasion after a sham trial

PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

  
Paris-Geneva, August 24, 2018 – Henadz Fiadynich and
Ihar Komlik have been found guilty of tax evasion charges today by the Saviecki
District Court of Minsk. Charges were brought against
them a year after the trade union helped to mobilize protests against
Presidential Decree No. 3 that established a fee on the unemployed. The
Observatory’s judicial observation mission reports that the politically
motivated trial fell well short of providing the essential fair trial
guarantees to the defendants and calls for their conviction to be quashed. 
 
The
trial started on July 30, 2018, and took place in the Saviecki District Court
of Minsk before Judge Maryna Fiodarava. Messrs. Henadz Fiadynich and Ihar
Komlik, respectively Chairman and Chief Accountant of the Belarusian
Independent Trade Union of Radio and Electronic Industry Workers (REP), were
charged under Article 243.2 of the Criminal Code for “Tax evasion on a large
scale”. The latter provision was previously used to prosecute Chairman of the
Human Rights Centre “Viasna” Ales Bialiatski, who spent three years in
prison in 2011-2014. The UN Human Rights Committee found his imprisonment
arbitrary since national legislation and decisions of the Belarusian
authorities made it impossible for "Viasna" to operate legally in
Belarus. Legislation abusively restricting the operation of civil society
organisations remains in force to date, forcing many organisations to register
abroad.    
 
The
government’s complaint charged that between 2011 and 2012, Messrs. Fiadynich
and Komlik conspired to receive transfers of foreign funding into a bank
account in Vilnius, Lithuania, and to withdraw and transport cash back to
Belarus with the help of co-workers and colleagues, without having reported
these receipts to the authorities.
 
Today
the Court issued its judgement, finding the defendants guilty of all charges
and sentencing them to 4 years of restriction of liberty without imprisonment,
as well as a fine.
 
“This trial made for a captivating spectacle,
with a surprise revelation of a paid KGB informant among its highlights,
but it also made a mockery of justice”,
said lawyer Ilya Nuzov, Head of FIDH’s Eastern Europe and Central Asia Desk,
who observed the proceedings. “There
was hardly any testimony or other evidence relevant to the incriminated period,
and the authorities fabricated practically the entire evidentiary base
underlying the judgment, confirming the political nature of the case.” 
 
Trial
observation revealed major flaws in the conduct of pre-trial investigation and
proceedings. During the trial, at least six of the witnesses examined by the
parties complained that their pre-trial statements were procured through
threats, intimidation and other pressure exerted by State agents during initial
questioning. While Judge Fiodarava ordered an investigation of these
allegations mid-way through the trial, this inquiry lacked independence and
thoroughness capable of effectively determining any wrongful conduct on behalf
of the authorities.  
 
Moreover,
the prosecution’s case was built around key pieces of evidence, including
unauthenticated bank records from a Lithuanian bank, and information about the
bank account and cash flows from foreign organisations procured using an
unknown email account. State witnesses refused to provide any specific
information regarding how this evidence was collected, referring in general
terms to the course of ‘investigative work.’ These facts weigh heavily against
the lawfulness and reliability of such evidence, as well as the ability of
Messrs. Komlik and Fiyadynich to prepare an adequate defense. 
 
The
Observatory believes that these actions by the authorities violate Belarus’
obligations under international human rights law and its own Constitution, and
that the convictions should therefore be vacated.
 
The Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is
to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu , the European Union
Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
For more information, please
contact:
FIDH: Ilya Nuzov (English / Russian) - +33 1 43 55 25
     18 - inuzov@fidh.orgOMCT: Delphine Reculeau / Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui
     (French / English / Spanish) - +41 228 09 49 39 