Sudan:  Sudan: waves of arrests against journalists in Khartoum
March 27, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2000 / MarchSudan: Sudan: waves of arrests against journalists in KhartoumSudan: Arrest of 6 journalists in Khartoum  Case SDN 270300  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sudan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudanese Victims of Torture Group (SVTG), a member of the OMCT network, of the arrest of six journalists in Khartoum in Sudan.  According to the information received, on March 22, 2000, 7.00pm the Sudanese security forces arrested Kamal Hassan Bakheit, Chief Editor of Al Sahafa Newspaper.  At 9.00pm, on the same day, the Sudanese poet and former diplomat Sidahmed Al Hardalou, was also arrested.  Both men were taken to the security offices in Khartoum North, near Shandi bus- station.  SVTG received reports that the two men were confined to their chairs throughout the night, without being interrogated.  Furthermore, on March 23, 2000, 2.00pm, the Sudanese security forces arrested four other journalists working at the Al Sahafa Newspaper.  They were Deputy Chief Editor Ahmed Omar Rabie, Head of the Political Section, Abdelgadir Hafiz and journalists Rabie Hamid and  Anwar Altikaina, both from the political section.  These journalists have not been interrogated, but it is believed that the reason behind these arrests is that the Al Sahafa Newspaper published articles, which the Security Forces believed supported the National Democratic Alliance (NDA), the opposition umbrella organisation. In addition recently Al Sahafa Newspaper interviewed Abdelaziz Khalid, the leader of the Sudanese Alliance Forces, (SAF) and published articles by Dr. Mansour Khalid, the advisor of John Garang .  According to the information, there is no news of the release of these six persons.  The journalists were arrested under the National Security Act, which provides the security forces with investigative powers that allow arrests, incommunicado detentions and long detentions without judicial review and arbitrary searches.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned persons; ii.	order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at  all times; iii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into these arrests and allegations of ill-treatment, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, People's Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan. Telex : 22385 PEPLC SD or 22411 KAID SD - Fax : (+249 11) 71 7 24  Mr. Abd al-Basit Sabdarat, Minister of Justice and Attorney-General, Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan.  Telex : 22459 KHRJA SD or 22461 KHRJA SD (via Ministry of Foreign Affairs) - Fax : (+249 11) 740 63  Mr. Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan.  Telex : 22459 KHRJA SD or 22461 KHRJA SD - Fax : (+249 11) 740 63  The Diplomatic Representatives of Sudan in your country  Geneva, March 27, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 