Libya:  In tough times, Benghazi commemorates 'International Day Against Torture'
June 22, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionEvents / Libya / 2013 / JuneLibya: In tough times, Benghazi commemorates 'International Day Against Torture'Download full article4 pages / 1.34 MB
PRESS RELEASE
For Immediate ReleaseSaturday, June 22, 2013In tough times, Benghazi commemorates ‘International Day Against
Torture’
Benghazi,
the birthplace of Libya’s February 17th Revolution, is fraught these
days with risk. In the past month, there have been bombings of police and
military installations, tense demonstrations, and shootouts between security
forces and other armed groups, resulting in dozens of casualties and hundreds
of injuries. OMCT is treading into this uncertain terrain this week to call for
an end to the violence on the occasion of June 26, the International Day in
Support of Victims of Torture. 
For
the second time since the revolution, OMCT is supporting its Libyan partners in
their commemoration of this day. OMCT is accompanying the National Council of Civil
Liberties and Human Rights in organizing a public conference on June 26 titled,
Drawing from the past to master our
future: the fight against torture in Libya. The event will focus on issues
of collective trauma and transitional justice.
In the
days leading up to this conference, Benghazi artists ‘Hamzawi’ and ‘Nadeer’
will lead a graffiti workshop for Benghazi youth. They will create a street
mural against torture with the support of Tunisian artists ‘Willis from Tunis’
and the ‘Zwewla’ group, as well as OMCT and the Cultural Council of the Union
for the Mediterranean. Symbolically, the mural will be painted (with permission)
on the wall of a militia headquarters. Currun Singh, Regional Advisor of OMCT,
said, “It’s important to push this conversation beyond the walls of the
conference room. The people of Benghazi were the first to take the streets in
the revolution and now you see amazing art everywhere on the street. The
revolution was only the beginning and we stand united with Benghazi to say no
to torture and no to violence.”
Film
screenings, a poetry night, and a musical concert are among the other events this
week organized by OMCT and its Libyan partners on the occasion of the
International Day in Support of Victims of Torture (see full program above and to the right). OMCT has been active in Libya ever since
the Abu Salim prison massacre in 1996, which it brought to the attention of the
Human Rights Committee of the United Nations. Since the revolution, it has been
accompanying civil society in fighting against torture and supporting legal
reforms.--The program of OMCT Libya is supported by the European Union. The content of this statement is the sole responsibility of OMCT. --
For more information, contact:Currun Singh                                                           Karim
SalemMENA Advisor                                                       Project
CoordinatorEmail: cs@omct.org                                                Email:
ks@omct.orgTel: +216 71 322 561 / + 41 22 809 4939               Tel: +216 71 322 561 / + 41 22 809 4939
Created
in 1985, the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) is today the main
coalition of international NGOs fighting against torture, summary executions,
enforced disappearances and all other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
With 311 affiliated organisations in its SOS-Torture Network and tens of
thousands of correspondents in every country, OMCT is the strongest network of
NGOs working to protect and promote human rights around the world. For more
information, visit us at www.omct.org,
on Facebook or Twitter. 