Russian Federation:  Release environmental activists now!
October  4, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2013 / OctoberRussian Federation: Release environmental activists now!

Paris-Geneva,
October 4, 2013. The Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), joins calls for the immediate release of 30 persons
arrested by the Russian authorities on September 18 and 19, 2013 for their
participation in a Greenpeace peaceful protest against oil drilling in the Arctic on
Gazprom's Prirazlomnaya offshore platform.
 
On September 26 and 29, 2013, 28 Greenpeace activists from
the Greenpeace ship Arctic Sunrise as well as a free-lance photographer
and a cameraman were ordered two months of custody by a Court in Murmansk,
facing investigation on a possible charge of “piracy” under Article 227 of the
Russian Criminal Code, carrying up to 15 years in jail. 
 
On October 2, 2013, the charges for “piracy” were
confirmed by a court in Murmansk against crew member Ms. Ana Paula Alminhana
Maciel (Brazil), freelance videographer Mr. Kieron Bryan (United
Kingdom - UK), Russian activist Roman Dolgov, Finnish activist Sini
Saarela, Swedish/American activist Dima Litvinov, UK activist Anthony
Perrett, a Ukranian crew member, Argentinian activist Camila Speziale,
Dutch activist Faiza Oulahsen, Dutch crew member Mannes Ubels,
Polish activist Tomaz Dziemianczuk, a Russian crew member, as well as UK
activists Alexandra Harris and Philip Ball. On October 3, 2013,
the hearings continued with charges for “piracy” confirmed against crew member Anne
Mie Roer Jensen from Denmark, crew member Jonathan Beauchamp from
New Zealand, freelance photographer Denis Sinyakov from Russia, crew
members Colin Russell from Australia and Andrey Allakhverdov from
Russia, as well as crew members Miguel Hernan Perez Orzi from Argentina,
Francesco Pisanu from France, Alexandre Paul from Canada, David
John Haussmann from New Zealand, and Cristian D'Alessandro from
Italy.
 
As of today, the 28 Greenpeace activists as well as
the free-lance photographer and the cameraman remain all detained in several
detention facilities of the Murmansk region.
 
“Activists peacefully protesting for the protection
of the fragile environment of the Arctic threatened by oil drillings should be
considered as human rights defenders, not as pirates” said FIDH President
Karim Lahidji.
 
“We
denounce the ongoing detention of those activists who were arrested for raising
public awareness about potential environmental consequences of oil exploration
in Arctic and remind the Russian authorities that the legitimate and peaceful activities of human
rights
defenders should not be obstructed”, urged OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock. “We
further recall that pre-trial detention should be used in exceptional circumstances”,
he added.
 
The Observatory recalls that the international agreed
definition of “piracy” enshrined in the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea refers to “illegal acts of violence or detention (…) committed for
private ends”, which is obviously not relevant in the present case. 
 
The Observatory recalls that the prosecution of the
Greenpeace crew is taking place against the background of a wider crackdown on
independent civil society organisations in Russia, many of which are facing
prosecution for their peaceful human rights activities. 
 
The Observatory calls on the Russian authorities to
immediately release the activists and drop all criminal charges against them,
and to ensure they have access to legal counsel.

The
Observatory more generally urges the Russian authorities to comply with the
United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders as well as international
and regional human rights instruments ratified by the Russian Federation. 