China:  China: death in detention of a Falun-Gong practitioner
April 11, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / China / 2000 / AprilChina: China: death in detention of a Falun-Gong practitionerChina: death in detention of Falun Gong practitioner  Case CHN 110400  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in China.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source of the death in detention of Ms. Chen Zi-xiu, a Falun-Gong practitioner in China.  According to the information received, on February 21 2000, it was announced that Ms. Chen Zi-xiu, 59, a Falun Gong practitioner from Shan-dong Province, had died in detention following a heart attack at 9am that morning.  According to information received, Ms. Chen Zi-xiu had been subjected to torture in the form of a beating following her arrest on 17th February 2000.  She was taken to the "Falun Gong Detention and Transformation Center" whereupon her family was ordered to pay a fine for her detention.  A fellow detainee told the family that Ms. Chen Zi-xiu was being beaten on 20th February 2000.  The following day, on February 21 2000, around 7pm, her family was taken to a hotel where it was announced that she had died from a heart attack.  However, they were reportedly not allowed to know where Ms. Chen Zi-xiu's body was or see the body.  They were eventually allowed to leave the hotel the next day and see the body in the mortuary.  Her daughter noted that "She had been dressed in funeral clothes and put on makeup.  When we opened her clothes, we saw big black and purple patches all over her body except the front upper part.  There were bruises everywhere.  Even her ears were dark purple in color.  Her teeth were broken.  Although she had been addressed with make up, there was still blood left.  In the yard, her clothes, quilt and underwear were covered with feces.  Almost all her clothes were cut into pieces by scissors."  Her family noted that Ms. Chen Zi-xiu was in good health before her arrest.    The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned by the death and alleged torture of Ms. Chen Zi-xiu, and that her death brings the number to 11 Falun Gong practitioners who have died in detention.  OMCT recalls appeals CHN 270799 and 270799.1 and reiterates its grave concern over the treatment of Falun Gong practitioners.  The International Secretariat of OMCT continues to receive numerous reports of ill-treatment and alleged torture of these detainees who have been placed in labour camps, mental hospitals and detention centres accross China.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in China urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of all detained practitioners of Falun Gong; ii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the the death of Ms. Chen Zi-xiu, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; iii.	put an immediate end to the persecution and harassment of Falun Gong practitioners; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  Premier of the People's Republic of China, Guowuyuan 9, Xihuangchenggenbeijie, Beijingshi 100032, People's Republic of China. Telexes: 210070 FMPRC CN or 22478 MFERT CN .  Fax : + 86 10 512 5810 (via Ministry of Foreign Affairs).  President of the Supreme People's Court of thePeople's Republic of China, REN Jianxin Yuanzhang, Zuigao Renmin Fayuan, 27 Dongjiao Min Xiang, Beijingshi 100726, People's Republic of China. Faxs: + 86106 512 5012  Li Loalin Tinzhang, Director of the Department of Public Security, Gong'anting, Haila'er Donglu, Huhehaoteshi 010051, Nei Menggu Zizqu, People's Republic of China.  Diplomatic Representatives of the People's Republic of China in your respective countries.  Geneva, April 11, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 