Sudan:  Sudan: release of Mr. Hashim Altayeb Yousif, continuing detention of 36 others
January 24, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2003 / JanuarySudan: Sudan: release of Mr. Hashim Altayeb Yousif, continuing detention of 36 othersCase SDN 031202.2 Follow-up to Case SDN 031202 Release / Incommunicado detention / Risk of torture  Geneva, January 24th, 2003  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sudan.  New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudanese Organisation against Torture, a member of the OMCT network, of the release of another one of the three brothers who had been arrested along with several other students in Khartoum in Sudan.  According to the information received, Mr. Hashim Altayeb Yousif, one of the three brothers arrested on 29 November 2002,  was released on 15 January 2003.  He was taken from Kober prison on 14 January 2003, and moved to security forces offices in Khartoum where he was kept in a small cell, nicknamed ‘the heater’ due to its high temperature.  Hashim had also spent the first day of his arrest in this cell.  Mr. Hashim Altayeb Yousif was reportedly released after he signed a pledge not to become involved with any other anti-government demonstrations or political activities. He confirmed that Atif Alsoni and Ahmed Makoy, both students from Southern Sudan, and Mawya Yagoub, a student and member of the PNC are still being detained in Kober prison along with another 32 members of People’s National Congress (PNC). Hashim’s brother Alshafie Altayeb Yousif also remains under arrest in Kober prison. These persons were arrested in the context of continued friction between the authorities and students. The Government made a number of arrests after clashes between student demonstrators and police during 22 to 24 October 2002, when sticks and rubber bullets were used by riot police against Khartoum University students.  More than 20 arrests were made during and following the demonstrations that were being held to mark the 38th anniversary of protests against the military government of General Abboud in October 1964. The authorities ordered a shut down of all of the University of Khartoum’s faculties on 14 November 2002.     According to the information received, 20-year old Khidir Altayeb Yousif, who was arrested during the early hours of December 29th, 2002, along with his two brothers Hashim Altayeb Yousif and Alshafie Altayeb Yousif, was released on December 16th, and has since given testimony concerning the torture to which he and his brothers, as well as other student detainees, were subjected during their detention.   The International Secretariat of OMCT welcomes the release of Hashim Altayeb Yousif but remains gravely concerned about the continuing detention of Alshafie Altayeb Yousif, Atif Alsoni, Ahmed Makoy, Mawya Yagoub, and the 32 members of People’s National Congress (PNC), notably given reports that the brothers and other student detainees were subjected to torture during their incommunicado detention. OMCT fears that those persons that remain in detention also risk being subjected to torture and therefore calls on the authorites to guarantee their personal integrity and to order their immediate and unconditional release and ensure that they receive adequate reparation. OMCT also urges the Sudanese Authorities to launch a prompt, exhaustive and impartial investigation into the allegations of the use of torture, identify those responsible and bring them to justice.  Brief reminder of the situation  According to Mr. Khidir Altayeb Yousif's statements, he and his brothers were arrested at gunpoint in their neighbour's house by 21 armed security officers, and were taken in a pickup truck to the Jabra neighbourhood, where the security officers arrested other students. They were then taken to the security offices near Magahbir Farough. They were held here along with other students, including: Alshaarani, from Alkalakla al ghoba square no.7; Mohamed Abdalrahman and six other students. These six students, who are all members of the PNC, claimed to have been arrested while praying in a mosque.   According to the information received, the security officers began beating and whipping Khidir Altayeb Yousif and his two brothers at around 2 am. The beatings were reportedly carried out by Gharieb Alla, who appeared to be in command, as well as officers named Adam (nick-named "Scary guy"), Alboasiari Mohamed Ahmed (who lives in the same neighbourhood as the three brothers), Bashir and seven other un-named officers. The brothers were reportedly questioned about the Sudanese Students Democratic Front and the Communist Party and about their other brother Lenin's whereabouts and political activities. The brothers were reportedly tortured from 2 am to 6 am, with the beatings lasting around 15 minutes per session with a short break in between. During the first 36 hours of their detention they were only provided with one "very poor" meal consisting of foul-smelling beans. The officers continued to verbally abuse the detainees throughout this time.  According to the information received, at 6.30 pm on November 29th, the brothers were moved to the security offices near Alghiyada Alamna (Army Headquarters), were they were initially detained for two hours in a very small cell, known as "the heater," which was very hot and had no ventilation. Hashim requested to go to the toilet during this time, but his request was refused. At 9 pm the same day they were taken to the political section of Kober Prison.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Alshafie Altayeb Yousif, Atif Alsoni, Ahmed Makoy, Mawya Yagoub, and the 32 members of People’s National Congress (PNC) who remain in detention; ii.	order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events, notably the allegations of the use of torture, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iv.	guarantee adequate reparation to all the victims of torture involved in this case; v.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, President's Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan.  Fax: + 24911 783223 ·	Mr. Ali Mohamed Osman Yassin, Minister of Justice and Attorney General, Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: +24911 788941  ·	Mr. Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan.  Fax: +24911 779383  ·	Mr. Yasir Sid Ahmed, Advisory Council for Human Rights, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan.  Fax: + 24911 779173 ·	His Excellency Ambassador Mr Ibrahim Mirghani Ibrahim, Permanent Mission of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 335, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax : +4122 7312656.  E-mail: mission.sudan@ties.itu.int  Please also write to the embassies of Sudan in your respective country.  Geneva, January 24th, 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 