Bangladesh:  Parliament should withdraw Foreign Donations Regulation Bill 2015
October 16, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2015 / OctoberBangladesh: Parliament should withdraw Foreign Donations Regulation Bill 2015

Geneva-Paris,
October 16, 2015. The Parliament of Bangladesh should withdraw the Foreign
Donations (Voluntary Activities) Regulation Bill 2015, which if passed would severely restrict the legitimate
activities of civil society and human rights defenders in Bangladesh, urged the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of OMCT and FIDH.
 
On
September 1, 2015, the Foreign Donations (Voluntary Activities) Regulation Act 2015 was tabled
before the Parliament of Bangladesh and is slated to be passed into law soon. 
 
“This new bill clearly aims at
establishing a permanent Damocles sword hanging over human rights NGOs in
Bangladesh, and in turn to silence victims of violations. Under this law,
organisations documenting and reporting human rights violations would be denied
funding clearance and would face possible de-registration. It is time for the
international community to wake up and see the dramatic closing of democratic
space in Bangladesh before it is too late”, stated Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT).
 
The new bill combines the
1978 Foreign Donations (Voluntary Activities) Regulation Ordinance and the 1982
Foreign Contributions (Regulation) Ordinance, and creates greater limitations
to the work of civil society in Bangladesh. Section 3 of the Bill stipulates
that non-governmental
organisations (NGOs) will not be allowed
to receive foreign donations or contributions without prior permission from the
NGO Affairs Bureau
(NGO-AB), which is under the direct supervision of the Prime Minister’s Office. NGOs will have to declare to the
Government the source of foreign donations and how they will be used. In
addition, they will have to be registered with the NGO-AB to undertake any
activities funded by foreign contributions, and to renew their registration
every 10 years. However, no time limit is specified for the registration
process, leaving open the risk of undue delays by the authorities. It is also
of concern that renewal of registration is conditioned to the fact that
“activities of the previous 10 years are found to be satisfactory” but without
providing a definition for “satisfactory” activities, which may lead to
arbitrary decision (Section 4).
 
Under the Act, the NGO-AB will also be empowered to inspect, monitor and
assess the activities of NGOs that receive foreign funding, allowing direct
control and surveillance over the activities of NGOs (Section 10). Moreover,
the Bill provides for punitive measures for violations of the law
by both organisations and individuals, which include fines, disciplinary action
and cancellation or suspension of
registration (Section 15).
 
“If passed, this new legislation would
severely undermine the crucial role that civil society organisations play in
Bangladesh. We call on the National Parliament
not to pass the Foreign Donations Regulation Bill 2015 into law, as it
clearly violates international human rights
standards that Bangladesh is bound to respect,” said Karim
Lahidji, FIDH President. 
 
The right of every individual to freedom of
association is a fundamental and universal right enshrined in numerous international
human rights instruments to which Bangladesh is a party, as well as by Articles
5 and 13 of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and by Article 38 of
the country’s Constitution.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders was created in 1997 by OMCT and FIDH. The overall objective of this
programme is to strengthen the action of human rights defenders in defence of victims and
to reduce their isolation and
vulnerability. It is also based on the absolute necessity to establish a
systematic response to the repression they face. 