Azerbaijan:  Press Release: Dismay as Rasul Jafarov is sentenced to 6 years and 3 months imprisonment in appeal
July 31, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Azerbaijan / 2015 / JulyAzerbaijan: Press Release: Dismay as Rasul Jafarov is sentenced to 6 years and 3 months imprisonment in appealAzerbaijan_2015.07.31_PR_English2 pages / 288 KBParis-Geneva,
July 31, 2015 – The sentencing of human rights defender Rasul
Jafarov to six years in prison was confirmed today by the before the Baku Court
of Appeal. Arbitrarily detained since August 2, 2014, the conviction of Mr.
Rasul Jafarov is based on trumped-up charges and aims at preventing him from
carrying out his legitimate human rights activities, the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders said today.
On July 31, 2015, the
Baku Court of Appeal sentenced Mr. Rasul Jafarov to 6 years and 3 months
imprisonment. Founder and Chairman of the Human Rights Club and an active member
in the “Sing for Democracy” and the "Art of Democracy” movements ahead of
the Eurovision song contest in Baku in May 2012, Mr. Jafarov was planning a
campaign called “Sports for Human Rights” prior to the Baku European Games when
he was arrested. Mr. Rasul Jafarov was sentenced in first instance on April 16,
2015, on spurious charges of “illegal entrepreneurship”, “tax evasion”, “abuse
of office”, “embezzlement” and “forgery”[1].
No evidence whatsoever of Mr. Jafarov's guilt was provided.
“Since the end of the Baku Games in June 2015, two human rights
defenders have already been sentenced in appeal to long prison terms. It sadly
paves the way to further harassment against other defenders whose trials are
presently ongoing”, said FIDH President Karim Lahidji.
A trial observer from
the Human Rights Centre in Georgia (HRIDC) represented the Observatory during
the July-31 hearing, which failed to meet international fair trial standards.
Mr. Jafarov was placed in a cage and the motion raised by the defence to let
the accused sit by his lawyers was denied.
Initially sentenced
to 6 and a half years in prison, the Court of Appeal dismissed the charge of
tax evasion and thus reduced his sentence by three months. In an attempt to
open a dialogue with the authorities, and although he does not plead guilty,
Mr. Jafarov paid the taxes. 
“Azerbaijan's current policy follows a very simple and sinister logic:
if you can't beat them, jail them. This latest sentence calls for a strong
reaction from the international community. Azerbaijan cannot get away with its
crackdown any longer.”, added OMCT Secretary General
Gerald Staberock.
Mr. Rasul Jafarov is
the second human rights defender to be sentenced in appeal among all those
targeted since the 2014 crackdown, which has witnessed the harassment, arrest and detention of all
prominent human rights defenders in the country. The trials of Ms. Leyla
Yunus Director of the Institute for Peace and Democracy (IPD) and member
of OMCT General Assembly, Mr. Arif Yunusov, Chief of IPD’s department of
conflictology, and of Ms. Khadija Ismayilova, award-winning
investigative journalist and well-known independent reporter, are currently
ongoing.
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in
1997 by FIDH
and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy
situations of repression against human rights defenders.
For more information,
please contact :
FIDH : Lucie Kroening (French / English / German
/ Arabic) - Tel: +33 6 48 05 91 57 (Paris) / Arthur Manet (French /
English / Spanish) - Tel: +33 6 72 28 42 94 (Paris)OMCT : Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui (French /
English / Spanish) - Tel: +41 22 809 49 24 (Geneva/Brussels)



[1] See The Observatory's trial observation
report, "If you can’t beat them, jail them": The case of Human Rights Defender Rasul Jafarov - Publication of a trial observation report", June 2015 