Iran:  Judicial harassment of Mr. Hadi Esmaeilzadeh
April 11, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2014 / AprilIran: Judicial harassment of Mr. Hadi Esmaeilzadeh​












IRN 002 / 0414 / OBS 027
Judicial harassment
Iran
April 11, 2014
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Iran.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been
informed by the Defenders of Human Rights Centre (DHRC) about the judicial
harassment of Mr. Hadi Esmaeilzadeh, an Iranian human rights lawyer and
member of the DHRC. 
 
According to the
information received, on April 15, 2014, Mr. Hadi Esmaeilzadeh is to be tried
by Branch 15 of the Islamic Revolution Court. During a preliminary
interrogation on July 12, 2011, he was notified of the charges of “assembly and
collusion with intent to commit anti-security crimes” based on his membership
of DHRC, and “spreading propaganda against the State”, and was banned from
leaving the country. However, his lawyers have
not been given the opportunity to access and read his file for next week’s
hearing. 
 
Since
the closure of the DHRC’s offices in 2008, Mr. Hadi Esmaeilzadeh has faced several interrogations by intelligence and security
organisations as well as pressures to resign from the DHRC. He was also
expelled from the Higher Institute of Banking of Iran in 2009 and from the
Islamic Azad University-Bam Unit in 2012 because he refused to resign from the
DHRC. 
 
The Observatory recalls
that Messrs. Abdolfattah Soltani and Mohammad Seifzadeh,
two other human rights lawyers and co-founders of the DHRC, are currently
serving long-term prison sentences in Tehran's Evin prison and Karaj’s
Rajaishahr prison, respectively, on charges related to their human rights
activities. In January 2013, the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention declared that Mr. Soltani's detention was arbitrary. Mr. Soltani
suffers from serious health problems but does not have adequate access to
proper medical care in detention or outside medical facilities. 
 
The Observatory expresses its deep concern with
the ongoing persecution against Mr. Esmaeilzadeh by
the intelligence and security organisations and the denial of his right to due
process, and calls on the Iranian authorities
to end his harassment, including at the judicial level. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please
write to the Iranian authorities and ask them to:
 
i. Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Hadi Esmaeilzadeh
as well as of all human rights defenders in Iran;
 
ii. Release immediately and unconditionally all
human rights defenders detained in Iran merely to sanction their human rights
activities;
 
iii. Put
an end to any kind of harassment - including at the judicial level - against Mr. Hadi Esmaeilzadeh and all human rights defenders in Iran and ensure in all circumstances that they can carry out their
activities without any hindrances;
 
iv. Conform
in all circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly,
in particular:
- its article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually
or in association with others, to promote the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, 
- and its article 12.2 which provides that “the State shall take all
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence,
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise
of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”;  
 
v. Ensure
in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Iran. 
 
Addresses:

· Leader of the
Islamic Republic, His Excellency Ayatollah Sayed Ali Khamenei, The Office of
the Supreme Leader, Shahid Keshvardoost St., Jomhuri Eslami Ave., Tehran,
Islamic Republic of Iran, Faxes: + 98 21 649 5880 / 21 774 2228, Email: info_leader@leader.ir 
· President Hassan
Rouhani, the Presidency, Palestine Avenue, Azerbaijan Intersection, Tehran,
Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: + 98 21 649 5880. 
· Head of the
Judiciary, His Excellency Ayatollah Sadeq Larijani, Office of the Head of the
Judiciary, Pasteur Street, Vali Asr Avenue, south of Serah-e Jomhuri, Tehran,
Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: +98 21 879 6671 / +98 21 3 311 6567, Email: info@bia-judiciary.ir
· Minister of
Foreign Affairs, Mohammad Javad Zarif, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Sheikh
Abdolmajid Kushk-e Mesri Av, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax:
+98-21-66743149; matbuat@mfa.gov.ir
· Secretary
General, High Council for Human Rights, Mr. Mohammed Javad Larijani, [Care of]
Office of the Head of the Judicary, Pasteur St, Vali Asr Ave, South of Serah-e
Jomhouri, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Email: info@humanrights-iran.ir
· H.E.
Mr. Mohsen Naziri Asl,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the United
Nations in Geneva, Chemin du Petit-Saconnex 28, 1209 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax:
+41 22 7330203, Email: mission.iran@ties.itu.int
· H.E. Mr. Mahmoud Barimani,
Ambassador, Embassy of Iran in Brussels, 15
avenue Franklin Roosevelt, 1050 Bruxelles, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 762
39 15. Email: secreteriat@iranembassy.be 
 
Please also write to
diplomatic representations of Iran in your respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva,
April 11, 2014
 
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 