Bangladesh:  Alleged torture and subsequent death in detention of Mr. Faruq Hossain Kamal_No proper investigation conducted
July 26, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2012 / JulyBangladesh: Alleged torture and subsequent death in detention of Mr. Faruq Hossain Kamal_No proper investigation conducted
Case BGD 260712
Death in
custody/ Alleged torture and ill-treatment/ No proper investigation/ Risk of
impunity
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Bangladesh.

Brief description of the situation
The
International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by ODHIKAR, a member of
OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the alleged torture and subsequent death in
detention of Mr. Faruq Hossain Kamal,
a 37-year-old businessman from Dhaka Metropolitan City, early 2012. OMCT is
concerned that, to date, no proper investigation has been reportedly carried
out into the circumstances of his death and that the perpetrators have not been
brought to justice.
According
to the information received, Mr. Faruq Hossain Kamal was arrested on 19
February 2012 by Sub Inspector (SI) Nuruzzaman, who came along with two other
policemen from Kafrul Police, in Boubazar area, in North Kafrul, and taken to
Kafrul Police Station. Mr. Faruq Hossain Kamal managed to call one of his
sisters who went to the police station. She was first not allowed to see her
brother and decided to wait at the police station. At around midnight, she reportedly
heard her brother scream and the sound of beatings. She was only allowed to
briefly see him after she gave 100 Taka to one of the policeman. Mr. Faruq
Hossain Kamal reportedly told his sister that he was arrested while he was at a
tea stale in North Kafrul. When he asked SI Nuruzzaman about the reasons for his
arrest, this latter reportedly told him that there was an arrest warrant
against him. Once at the police station, he was allegedly beaten by policemen
and SI Nuruzzaman asked him for 50’000 Taka or otherwise he would be tortured
and killed. Mr. Faruq Hossain Kamal then asked his sister to collect the money
in order to get him released. However, she did not manage to gather that
amount. 
According
to the same information, on 20 February 2012, at about 9 am, Mr. Faruq Hossain
Kamal’s sister went back to the police station to bring him some breakfast. He
reportedly told her that SI Nurussaman threatened him anew. She was then
informed by police station duty officer that her brother would be taken to
court. When she arrived at the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate Court she could
not find her brother and went back to Kafrul Police Station. However, she was
not allowed to see him. 
A few
days later, on 28 February 2012, an unknown person called Mr. Faruq Hossain
Kamal’s sister and told her that her brother was very sick and admitted to ward
218 of Dhaka Medical College Hospital. Once at the hospital, she was informed
that her brother had died and that his body was at the morgue. She reportedly
noticed that the body of her brother was bloated and it had dark bruises on the
legs. She was reportedly later informed that her brother had been brought by
the police to the court on 21 February 2012, and the next day to Dhaka Central
Jail. There, he had been reportedly admitted to the prison hospital after the
jail authorities noticed his poor physical condition before being transferred
to Dhaka Medical College Hospital after his condition deteriorated. 
According
to the same information, the police denied any torture against Mr. Faruq
Hossain Kamal and reported that he had died further to an epilepsy attack and a
heart disease. 
The International
Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned about the circumstances surrounding
the death of Mr. Faruq Hossain Kamal and calls
upon the competent authorities to carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into
the circumstances of these events, notably the allegations of torture, in
accordance with international human rights standards, such as the UN Principle
on the Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and
Summary Executions, the result of which must be made public, in order to bring
those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and
apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law.
OMCT
recalls that the authorities have to fulfil their obligations under
international human rights law to protect the right to life and the right not
to be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment and to bringing to justice those responsible for violating this
right.
Actions Requested 
Please
write to the authorities in Bangladesh urging them to:
i.                  Carry out a prompt, effective, thorough,
independent and impartial investigation into the surroundings of
the death of Mr. Faruq Hossain Kamal, in
accordance with international human rights standards, inter alia, with the UN
Principle on the Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extra-legal,
Arbitrary and Summary Executions, the result of which must be made public, in
order
to bring
those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and
apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;
ii.                Ensure that adequate, effective and prompt
reparation, including adequate compensation, is granted to the victim’s family;
iii.              Guarantee
the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country
in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
Ø Ms. Sheikh Hasina, Prime
Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, Gona Bhaban, Old Sangsad Bhaban,
Tejgaon, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Fax: +880 2 8113243, Email: info@pmo.gov.bd
Ø Ms. Shahara Khatun, Minister
for Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat Building 4,
Dhaka, Bangladesh, Fax: +88-02-716967, Email: minister@mha.gov.bd
Ø Barrister Shafique
Ahmed, Minister for Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Ministry of
Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka,
Bangladesh, Fax: +88-02-7168557, Email: info@minlaw.gov.bd
Ø Mr.Hassan Mahmood
Khandker, Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, Phoenix Road,
Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh, Fax: +88-02-9563362, 9563363, Email: ig@police.gov.bd
Ø Ambassador Mr. Abdul Hannan,
Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh to the United Nations
in Geneva, 65 rue de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 46 16,
E-mail: mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.int
Please also
write to the embassies of Bangladesh in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 26
July 2012
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply 