Angola:  Angola: Extrajudicial killing of three children
January 12, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / Angola / 2000 / JanuaryAngola: Angola: Extrajudicial killing of three childrenCase AGO 120100.CC CHILD CONCERN  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Angola.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT was informed by a reliable source of the extrajudicial killing of three children in various incidents.  According to the information received, OMCT was informed by a reliable source of the extrajudicial killings of three children on December 11 1999 by Angolan Government (FAA) troops.  Two of these deaths were part of a massacre of a total of 27 persons.  Two children, whose father Muyenga was also killed in the incident, were reportedly executed by the Angolan Government troops, along with 25 other persons, (see case AGO 120100).  This massacre, perpetrated by Angolan forces, took place on December 11, 1999 along the Kavango River.  According to information received, reports indicate that immediately before the incident took place, the victims were in the custody of members of Namibian security forces, viz. Certain David JACOBS, Hangombe NAMBWANGU, Herman NDARA, Rafael HAMUTENYA, Simon MANDENGU, Lucas JOHANNES, SEKO (from Vungu-vungu) and SIPWEKA, all members of the notorious paramilitary unit, the Special Field Force (SFF).  Seko and Sipweka are said to have been drivers for the unit shortly before the massacre took place.  The victims were handed over to the Angolan Government (FAA) troops, who then carried out the massacre shortly afterwards.  In addition to these events, in another incident and in what appears to be a “shoot first and ask questions later” policy, a six year old Angolan girl refugee was shot and killed, allegedly by members of the SFF.  The incident took place at approximately 06h00 on January 10 at a tourist Levi Hakusembe Lodge some 20 kilometers west of Rundu.   According to the information, the dead child was part of a group of between 25 and 30 Angolan men, women and children fleeing from the intensified fighting in southeastern Angola.  At least 200 shots were reportedly fired directly at the refugees who at the time were sitting in the floodlights of the said lodge.  Another person was shot in the leg and seriously wounded.  Actions requested  Please write to the Angolan authorities urging them to:  i.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of the deaths of these three children, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law;  ii.	guarantee adequate, compensation and rehabilitation to the families of those killed;   iii.	guarantee all human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards.  Addresses  His Excellency José Eduardo dos Santos, President of the Republic, Futungo de Belas, Luanda, Republic of Angola. Fax :+002442392733  His Excellency Venâncio da Silva Moura, Palácio do Comércio, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Avenida Comandante Gika, Luanda, Republic of Angola  His Excellency  Paulo Chipilica, Ministry of Justice,, Ministry of Justice,  Luanda, Republic of Angola. Telegram : Ministro Chipilica, Ministerio da Justicia, Luanda, Angola.  Exmo Sr. Dr. Antero Gruedosa Abreu, Procurador Geral da República, Procuradoria Geral da República, Luanda, República de Angola. Telegram : Procurador Geral da República, Luanda, Angola.  Geneva, January 12, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 