Hungary:  Attacks against civil society must stop
June 12, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Hungary / 2014 / JuneHungary: Attacks against civil society must stopParis-Geneva, June 12, 2014. As the Hungarian Government meets today
representatives from Norway, Iceland and
Lichtenstein to discuss the European Economic Area Grants, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, an FIDH-OMCT joint programme, expresses its deep concern that the
Hungarian government is alarmingly shrinking the space of civil society by
hindering their access to funding, conducting unexpected inspections and
blacklisting prominent human rights organisations. 
 
Since its
re-election on April 6, 2014, the Hungarian Government has led a smearing
campaign against Hungarian human rights NGOs and is striving to gain control
over them or silence them by hindering their access to funding. 
 
“The Hungarian government is deliberately
reducing the room for manoeuvre of human
rights NGOs, known for being critical of policies implemented since 2010” commented FIDH President Karim
Lahidji. “The recent moves undertaken by the government to restrain civil
society’s action echoes Putin's Russia recent attempts to silence dissenting
voices, speaking out for the respect of human rights” he added. 
 
One
day after its re-election on April 7, 2014, the Hungarian Government targeted
the Norwegian Civic Fund (NCTA), a small portion of the Norway Grants,
which are one of the financial mechanisms through which Norway, Iceland and
Liechtenstein fund projects in EU countries under the European Economic Area
Grants. The NCTA is administered by a consortium
of four Hungarian foundations – Ökotárs Foundation, Autonomia Foundation,
DemNet - Foundation for Development of Democratic Rights and Carpathian
Foundation – which the Government accused of political meddling with Norway to
unduly influence Hungarian politics. Norway has firmly rejected those
accusations. 
 
On
May 30, 2014, the Government also made public the list of 13 grant recipients[1]
it considered to be problematic for their “left-leaning” political ties. These
were all organisations working on anti-corruption, human rights, gender
equality and freedom of speech. On the list appear the well-known Hungarian
Civil Liberties Union, Transparency International and the investigative journal
atlatszo.hu. All of these organisations have
been receiving grants from Norway Grants, for amounts ranging from 4,000 to
120,000€ each. 
 
“What should be a straightforward process between
donors and receiving association is transformed into a repressive State interference
to stifle NGOs”, said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock. “By labelling human rights groups as political groups acting
against national interest, Hungary is acting in ways known of authoritarian regimes.
Freedom of expression and association in a democratic society include dissent
and at times controversial debates on human rights”, he added.
 
The
move follows a series of actions and legislative reforms undertaken by the
government in the past years since its first election in 2010 aimed at
progressively restricting the space of civil society and independent critical
voices in Hungary. This included the adoption in 2010 of a Media Law that
significantly restricted freedom of expression and media freedom in Hungary,
and a series of constitutional reforms that progressively eroded the powers of
independent authorities and curtailed civil liberties in the country. Both the
Media Law and the reforms were met with severe criticism by NGOs and
international organisations, including the European Union, the Council of
Europe and the OSCE.
 
The
Observatory reminds the Hungarian authorities that the UN Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders provides that everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, “at the national and international levels […] to form,
join and participate in non-governmental organizations, associations or groups”
(Article 5) and “to solicit, receive and utilize resources for the express
purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms
through peaceful means” (Article 13). 
 
“The Hungarian State must
move from a system where the State assumes the right to restrict civil
society’s action by hindering their access to funding to one where it fulfils
its obligation to support, directly or indirectly, the funding of civil society
activities. This implies that States recognise the crucial role played in
society by NGOs to ensure better compliance with its own domestic and
international human rights obligations”,
Messrs. Lahidji and Staberock concluded.



[1] The
full list, with the amount of grants awarded, is available at http://444.hu/2014/05/30/itt-a-kormany-listaja-a-szervezetekrol-akik-miatt-nekimentek-a-norveg-alapnak/ 