Occupied Palestinian Territory :  Palestine Autonomous Areas: arbitrary arrest and detention of Director General in the Ministry of Youth and Sports
June  6, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Occupied Palestinian Territory  / 2000 / JuneOccupied Palestinian Territory : Palestine Autonomous Areas: arbitrary arrest and detention of Director General in the Ministry of Youth and SportsPalestine:  arbitrary arrest and detention of Director General in the Ministry of Youth and Sports  Case PAL 060600  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Palestine Autonomous Areas.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Palestinian Society for the Protection of Human Rights and the Environment (LAW), a member of the OMCT network, of the arrest and detention on Sunday 21st May 2000, of Mr. Mohammad Muqbel, Director General in the Ministry of Youth and Sports, in the absence of an arrest warrant or due legal procedure.  According to LAW’s information, gathered from a letter sent by Muqbel from the prison in addition to an affidavit from his son, Mr. Muqbel was detained and arrested when he was returning home with his son from a condolence visit to the family of Issa Abed, who was shot and killed during the recent clashes in solidarity with Palestinian prisoners. (See Case ISR 160500).  In the letter to LAW that he managed to send from prison, Muqbel wrote that his detention was due to his active participation in one of the demonstrations in solidarity with Palestinian prisoners.  He added that a number of criminal department agents had asked him to sign a pledge to refrain from inciting against the PNA and carrying out nationalistic activities, but he refused.  He has been held in solitary confinement in the Ramallah Central Prison, where no one is allowed to visit him.  It is also reported by Muqbel’s son that his father suffers respiratory problems and that he supports 6 family members.  Mr. Muqbel is currently being held in confinement with Omar Asaf, who was arrested at 1:00am on Friday, May 5, 2000 after expressing his opinion on the ‘Love and Peace’ radio station. (See Case PAL 100500).  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Palestine Autonomous Areas urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Mohammad Muqbel and order his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times; ii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  Yasser Arafat, President of the Palestinian Authority, Abu Khadra Building, Omar al-Mukhtar Street, Gaza, via Israel.  Fax : + 972 7 2822 365/6 ( if voice, say "fax, please"). Palestinian Authority, Minister of Justice, Abu Khadra Building, Omar al-al-Mukhtar Street, Gaza, via Israel. Fax : + 972 7 822 236 or +972 7 286-7109 Khalid al-Qidrah, Attorney General, Palestinian Authority, Attorney General Building, Yarmouk, Gaza, via Israel.  Fax : + 972 7 824 503.  Geneva, June 6, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 