Philippines:  Alleged torture and other ill-treatment of Mr. Elmer Ehorango Desoyo and two minors by members of the army
June 14, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2012 / JunePhilippines: Alleged torture and other ill-treatment of Mr. Elmer Ehorango Desoyo and two minors by members of the army
Case PHL 140612/ PHL 140612.CC
URGENT CAMPAIGNS/ CHILD CONCERN
Alleged torture and ill-treatment/ Death threats/
Arbitrary arrest and detention/ Risk of impunity
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in
the following situation in the Philippines.
Brief description of
the situation
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been
informed by the Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP), a member of
OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the arrest and alleged torture and other
ill-treatment of Mr. Elmer Ehorango Desoyo, 20 years old, and two minors, R.D.S,
17 years old and R.R., 16 years old[1],
on 22 March 2012.  
According to the information received, R.D.S,
R.R. and Mr. ElmerEhorango Desoyo,
who are friends, were looking for a job on 22 March 2012. Around 5 pm, they were
on their way home to Sitio Tagbakan, San Andres, Quezon when they met two
civilian-clothed men, believed to be members of the 74th Infantry
Battalion of the Philippine Army. The two men, who were in possession of high
powered guns (M16), arrested the three and blindfolded them, as well as tied their
hands. They had then to lie down and crawl on the ground, while they were being
kicked. Mr. ElmerEhorango Desoyo
was allegedly hit with the M16 twice on his right side and was shot near his
ear with a long firearm. They were reportedly not informed of the reasons for
their arrest.
Around 7 pm, R.D.S, R.R. and Mr. ElmerEhorango Desoyo were reportedly taken
by the military to a camp at Sitio Malamig, Barangay Sto., Niño, San Francisco
municipality, Quezon. There, they were interrogated, while still blindfolded
and half-naked. They were asked if they were members of the New People’s Army
(NPA), the armed
group of the Communist Party of the Philippines, and if they knew any member of
the NPA. They were allegedly threatened to be killed if they would not mention
any name. 
The next day, on 23 March 2012, R.D.S.,
R.R. and Mr. ElmerEhorango Desoyo were
taken to the San Andres Police Station, where for the first time their
blindfolds were taken off. They were subsequently brought to a fiscal for inquest,
and were charged with illegal possession of firearms. According to the same information,
they were unable to get a lawyer of their own choice and their parents were
only informed about their arrest by the military once they were brought to the
fiscal. 
According to the same information
received, R.D.S, a minor at the moment of his arrest and who turned 18 while in
detention on 2 May 2012, and Mr. ElmerEhorango
Desoyo are currently detained in Quezon Provincial Jail in Lucena, where they
are awaiting their trial. R.R. has been reportedly handed over to the National
Training Centre for the Boys in Tanay, Rizal on 30 April 2012. 
OMCT is gravely concerned for the safety
of R.D.S., R.R. and Mr. ElmerEhorango
Desoyo and urges the relevant
authorities to take all necessary measures to guarantee their physical and
psychological integrity, at all times, in accordance with international law, in
particular the UN Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the Convention on the Rights of the Child. OMCT recalls that the authorities have to
fulfil their obligations under international human rights law to protect the
right not to be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment and to bringing to justice those responsible for
violating this right.
In its Conclusions and Observations,
issued after examining the Philippines’ report in May 2009, the Committee
against Torture expressed concern over “the climate of impunity for
perpetrators of acts of torture, including military, police and other States officials,
(…)” and accordingly recommended to the State party to “ensure that all
allegations of torture and ill-treatment are investigated promptly, effectively
and impartially, and that the perpetrators are prosecuted and convicted in
accordance with the gravity of the acts, as required by article 4 of the
Convention”. The Committee also recommended that “the State party takes all
necessary measures to address the de facto practice of detention of suspect by
the Philippines National Police and the Armed Forces of the Philippines (…)”
(CAT/C/PHL/CO/2, §§ 9 and 12).  
With regard to the victims R.R. and R.D.S,
OMCT recalls that their arrest and detention infringe the principle according to
which deprivation of liberty of a child (below 18 years old) should “be used
only as a measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of
time” (article 37-b of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child). OMCT also
recalls that "every child deprived of liberty shall be treated with
humanity and respect for the inherent dignity of the human person, and in a
manner which takes into account the needs of persons of his or her age"
(article 37-c of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child) as well as the
fact that the State Party must ensure that "every child alleged as or
accused of having infringed the penal […] not to be compelled to give testimony
or to confess guilt" (article 40-b-iv of the UN Convention on the Rights
of the Child).
Action
Requested

Please write to the authorities in the Philippines urging them to: 
i.              
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of R.D.S, R.R. and Mr. ElmerEhorango Desoyo; 
ii.             
Grant them
unrestricted access to a lawyer of their choice and their families, as well as
guarantee that they are examined by independent doctors and receive adequate
medical care if necessary; 
iii.           
Carry out a
prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into these events, in particular into the
allegations of torture and other ill-treatment, the result of which must be
made public, in orderto bring those
responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply
penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law, particularly
under the Republic Act 9745 also known as the Anti-Torture Law of 2009;
iv.           
Order their
immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent
with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring them
before an impartial, independent and competent tribunal and guarantee their
procedural rights at all times;
v.             
Guarantee that no evidence obtained under torture
and other forms of ill-treatment, or threats thereof, be used in court
proceedings against them as stipulated in Article 15 of the UN
Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
vi.           
Ensure
that an effective remedy as well as the right to full redress, including
compensation and rehabilitation, is granted to the victims concerned;  
vii.          
Guarantee
the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country
in accordance with national laws, notably the
Anti-Torture Law of 2009, and international human rights standards.
Addresses
Ø His Excellency Benigno Simeon
Aquino III, President of the Republic of the Philippines, Malacanang Palace, JP
Laurel Street , San Miguel, Manila 1005, Philippines, Fax: +63 2 736 1010,
Email: corres@op.gov.ph
/opnet@ops.gov.ph
Ø Hon. Leila M. De Lima, Secretary,
Department of Justice (DOJ), Padre Faura Street, Ermita, Manila, 1000,
Philippines, Fax: +63 2 523 9548, Email: lmdelima@doj.gov.ph
/ doj.delima@gmail.com
Ø Secretary Voltaire T. Gazmin, Secretary,
Department of National Defense (DND), Camp Gen. Emilio F. Aguinaldo, Quezon
City 1110, Philippines, Fax: +63 2 982 5640, Email: webmaster@dnd.gov.ph
Ø Chairperson Loretta Ann P.
Rosales, Commission on Human Rights (CHR), SAAC Bldg., Commonwealth Avenue,
U.P. Complex, Diliman, Quezon City, Philippines, Fax: +63 2929 0102, Email:
chair.rosales.chr@gmail.com
Ø Lieutenant General Jessie D
Dellosa, AFP, Chief of Staff, Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), DND Building,
Camp Gen Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City 1110, Philippines, Fax: +63 2 421
3531, Email: bacsecretariat@dnd.gov.ph
Ø Permanent Mission of the Philippines to the United
Nations in Geneva, 47 Avenue Blanc, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 716
19 32, Email: mission.philippines@ties.itu.int
Please also write to the embassies of the Philippines in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 14 June 2012
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.



[1] Their names have been withheld. 