Sudan:  Release of Dr. Mohammed Julal Hashim
August 30, 2007
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2007 / AugustSudan: Release of Dr. Mohammed Julal HashimCase SDN 200607.3 Follow up of case SDN 200607, SDN 200607.1 and SDN 200607.2 Release Geneva, 30 August 2007 The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) received new information on the following situation in Sudan. New information The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudan Organisation Against Torture (SOAT), a member of the SOS-Torture network, of the release on 24 August 2007 from Dabak prison in the North of Khartoum of Dr. Mohammed Julal Hashim, University Lecturer, who was arrested on 15 June 2007 following the Kajabar Dam protest in Sudan’s Northern State and detained since then. Dr. Mohammed Julal Hashim was reportedly released after signing a statement whereby he agrees to refrain from participating in further political activities. The International Secretariat of OMCT welcomes the release of Dr. Mohammed Julal Hashim although it deplores the conditions of his release. Reminder of the situation On 13 June 2007 four persons were killed and nine other civilians were injured by the police and security forces in the Farraig village during a peaceful demonstration against the building of the Kajabar Dam in the area. According to the information, the four civilians who were killed are:  Mr. Shaik Aldin Haj Ahmed (m), 25 years old, Farmer Mr.  Mohamed Fagir Diab (m), 21 years old, High School student at Farraig Mr. Alsadig Salim (m), 40 years old, Farmer Mr. Almoiz Mohamed Abdelrahim(m), 21 years old  The injured persons are:  Mr. Sid Ahmed Osman Nori(m),  Miskaila village Mr. Khairi Osman Ismail, Miskaila village   Mr. Farag Abdelrahim Farag (m), Fad East Village Mr. Hamid Hamad Hamid (m), Kajabar Mr. Mursi Sid Ahmed (m),  Kajabar   Mr. Mohamed Mustafa (m), Jeddi village Mr. Osman Ibrahim(m), Farraig village Mr. Abdelrazig Yaqoub (m),  Miskaila village Mr. Alfadil Mohamed Fagiri (m),  Kajabar  The injured civilians were reportedly admitted later to Dongola hospital for medical treatment. Following this event, the security and intelligence forces in Dongola reportedly arrested and detained four journalists namely, Mr. Alfatih Abdullah (Al-Sudani daily), Mr. Qazafi Abdulmotalab (Al-Ayam daily), Mr. Abuobaida Awad (Rai-Alshaab daily) and Mr. Abulgasim Farahna (Alwan daily) and three lawyers namely Mr. Emad Merghni Seed Ahmed (written Imad Mirghani Sid-Ahmed in urgent appeal SDN 200607), Mr. Alam Aldeen Abd Alghni (written Alam Eldin Abdelgayoum in urgent appeal SDN 200607) and Mr. Abd Allah Abd Alghume (written Ali Abdelgayoum in urgent appeal SDN 200607), on the late evening of 13 June 2007 at around 23:00, while they were passing by Dongola on their way to Kajabar dam area. While the four jounalists were all released from Kober prison on 20 June 2007,  the three lawyers were only released on 19 August 2007 at 3 pm, allegedly after signing a document whereby they agreed to abide by certain conditions, namely to refrain from engaging in further political activities On 14 June 2007, the security forces in Khartoum detained a further five people, in connection with the same incident of Kajabar dam demonstrations. The Nubians in Khartoum were having a protest demonstration against the killing of their people in Northern Sudan. Security forces reportedly raided the house of a Nubian family, at mid-night on 14 June 2007, searching for a Nubian activist who had spoken on the same day to the BBC radio on the issue of Kajabar killings. He was not there at the time they raided the house but they reportedly arrested five persons present in the house. They detained them and took them into a security house at St. 57 Amarat – Khartoum, where they were subjected to interrogation and investigation on their relation to the Nubian Movement and the Anti- Kajabar Dam Committee. Among the five detainees was reportedly SOAT’s lawyers network member Mr. Yasir Mohamed Salih (42 years old- lawyer) who happened to be in the house that night. Mr. Yasir Mohamed Salih and other two detainees, namely Mr. Abdulkareem Makki Abdulkareem, a 22 years old student and Mr. Faisal Abdulrahman Nasr, a 48 years old private sector employee, were released on 15 June 2007 at 6:00 am. Two others persons remained detained namely, Mr. Ahmed Rumrum, a 40 years old lawyer and Mr. Raafat Hasan Abass, a 40 years old private sector employee but were then released on 16 June 2007 and 23 June 2007 respectively. Two additional individuals were reportedly also arrested following the protest and detained in Dabak prison, namely Mr. Osman Shammat, a driver arrested in Dongola on 13 June 2007, and Dr. Mohammed Julal Hashim. While Mr. Osman Shammat was released on 19 August 2007 at 3 pm (at the same time as the three above mentioned lawyers) allegedly after signing a document whereby he agreed to abide by certain conditions, namely to refrain from engaging in further political activities, Dr. Mohammed Julal Hashim remained in detention. Remarks OMCT wishes to thank all of the individuals and organizations that have taken action as a response to the urgent appeal. No further action is currently required on your part concerning this case. *** Geneva, 30 August 2007 