Philippines:  Release of Senator Leila de Lima urged on the one-year anniversary of her detention
February 23, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2018 / FebruaryPhilippines: Release of Senator Leila de Lima urged on the one-year anniversary of her detention

Paris-Geneva, February 23, 2018The
Observatory condemns Philippine Senator Leila de Lima’s arbitrary and
politically motivated detention, and calls for her immediate release and for
all charges against her to be dropped. Tomorrow will mark one year since
Senator de Lima, a critic of Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte, was detained
on unsubstantiated drug charges.
 
“Senator de Lima’s arbitrary detention is
aimed at silencing her and intimidating other lawmakers and government critics
from speaking out against the brutal killings that have been carried out as
part of President Duterte’s ‘war on drugs.’ She should be immediately released
and all charges against her dropped,” said FIDH Secretary-General Debbie
Stothard.
 
On February 24, 2017, Ms. Leila de
Lima handed herself in to police, a week after the Department of Justice filed
three charges against her under the Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act, and a
day after a Manila court issued a warrant for her arrest. The charges were
related to de Lima’s alleged involvement in a drug trafficking ring inside the
New Bilibid Prison in Metro Manila’s Muntinlupa City, while she was Department
of Justice Secretary. If convicted, de Lima could face between 12 years and
life in prison.
 
De Lima has been a staunch critic of
President Duterte’s approach to combatting crimes and drug trafficking. In
2009, as Chair of the Philippine Commission on Human Rights (CHR), she
initiated a probe into Duterte’s involvement in the ‘Davao Death Squad’ during
his time as mayor of Davao City. In August 2016, as Chair of the Senate
Committee on Justice and Human Rights, de Lima convened hearings on the hundreds
of killings that had been carried out as part of President Duterte’s ‘war on
drugs.’ On September 19, 2016, a group of Senators voted to replace de Lima as
Chair of the Committee, effectively shutting down the hearings.
 
President Duterte has repeatedly targeted
de Lima. Prior to her imprisonment, he had pledged to “destroy her in public.”
He also made personal attacks against her, accusing de Lima of “immorality” for
allegedly having had an affair with her driver.
 
“The attacks on Senator de Lima’s reputation
and the fabricated charges brought against her are a direct retaliation for
criticizing President Duterte’s full frontal attack on human rights. De Lima’s
prosecution reflects the increasingly difficult environment that human rights
defenders face in the Philippines under President Duterte,” said OMCT Secretary General
Gerald Staberock.
 
De Lima has
been in pre-trial detention at the Philippine National Police
Custodial Center at Manila’s Camp Crame since her arrest. Bail is not permitted
under the charges and de Lima’s arraignment in all three cases has been delayed
as the Department of Justice is still amending its information. This is
contrary to Article 9(3) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights (ICCPR), to which the Philippines is a State party. Article 9(3) of the
ICCPR stipulates that anyone arrested or detained on a criminal charge is
entitled to trial “within a reasonable time or to release,” and that the
detention of persons awaiting trial should not be “the general rule.”
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the
Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or
remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT
are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights
Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
Press contacts:
·      
FIDH:
Samuel Hanryon: +33 6 72 28 42 94 / Audrey Couprie: +33 6 48 05 91 57
·      
OMCT:
Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39 