Cameroon:  Cameroon : release of five detainees on bail
May 15, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Cameroon / 2001 / MayCameroon: Cameroon : release of five detainees on bailCase CMR 080501.1 Follow-up to Case CMR 080501.1  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information concerning the following situation in Cameroon.  New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source of  the release of detainees  in Cameroon.  According to the information received, the Cameroon authorities released five detainees on bail on May 8th 2001, following their arrest on April 26th, including political activists Thameni Djeukam, Léandre Djino, Peter William Mandio, Pokam Sindjou (Yaounde University philosopher) and Olivier Sande. Olivier Sande is a key witness of human rights abuses, including torture and extrajudicial executions, allegedly conducted by the Operational Command.   The five men were part of a group of ten men arrested in Duala's New Bell neighbourhood, reportedly because of their participation in a demonstration, for which they will go on trial on July 11th 2001. The fate of the other five men is not clear at this point. According to reports, they were not tortured during their detention.  Brief reminder of the situation  According to the information received, the Cameroon police forces have allegedly arrested around 10 protestors in Duala's New Bell neighbourhood, including political activists Thameni Djeukam, Léandre Djino, Peter William Mandio, Pokam Sindjou (Yaounde University philosopher) and Olivier Sande.  According to the reports, the activists were engaged in organising a rally to mourn all the victims of the current regime in Cameroon, which has been in place since April 6th 1984, and more specifically, the victims of the Operational Command (Commandement Opérationel).  OMCT was gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of all of the detainees, notably for Olivier Sande, who survived 40 days of incarceration and ill-treatment by the Operational Command in their detention facilities known as "Kosovo," and is a key witness of human rights abuses, including torture and extrajudicial executions, allegedly conducted by the Operational Command.  OMCT wishes to thank all those institutions, organisations and individuals who intervened on the detainees’ behalf.   Geneva, May 15, 2001 