Azerbaijan:  The United Nations find the detention of Hilal Mammadov arbitrary; immediate release and compensation requested
March 27, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2014 / MarchAzerbaijan: The United Nations find the detention of Hilal Mammadov arbitrary; immediate release and compensation requestedWGAD Opinion on case of Hilal Mammadov_Azerbaijan10 pages / 522 KB

Paris-Geneva,
March 27, 2014. FIDH and OMCT, in the framework of the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, welcome the opinion rendered by the
United Nations (UN) Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD), which
considers the detention of human rights defender Hilal Mammadov as arbitrary,
and requests his immediate release.
 
Mr. Hilal Mammadov is a defender of the rights of
the Talysh ethnic minority and Editor-in-chief of the Tolishi-Sado (Voice of
Talysh) newspaper. He was arrested on June 21, 2012, and sentenced to five
years in prison following unfair proceedings lodged on the basis of spurious
criminal offences relating to “illegal selling of drugs”, “high treason”, and
“incitement to national, racial, social and religious hatred and hostility”
under Articles 234.4.3, 274 and 283 of the Azeri Criminal Code. Mr. Mammadov has
remained detained since then. The Observatory has been following his situation
very closely since his arrest.
 
The opinion of the UN WGAD (A/HRC/WGAD/2013/59) was adopted
during its 68th session held in November 2013, and transmitted on
March 19, 2014 to the Observatory as the “source” of the information the WGAD
received on the case.
 
According to the WGAD “the
Government did not provide any satisfactory explanation as to the allegations
put forward by the source concerning the arbitrary character of the charges
against Mr. Mammadov and his subsequent conviction” and “the response from the
Government does not adequately address the source's allegations of
ill-treatment (…) in detention, its concerns for his health, nor the groundless
rejection of his application for an audio-visual recording of the hearing”.
 
Accordingly, the UN WGAD concluded that “the charges of treason and incitement to national, racial, social and
religious hatred and hostility are based on Mr. Mammadov's legitimate exercise
of the right of freedom of expression under article 19 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and article 19 of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights”, and that the violations of international law
relating to the right to a fair trial are of such gravity as to give the
deprivation of liberty of Mr. Hilal Mammadov an arbitrary character, under
categories II and III of its methods of work.
 
The Observatory urges the Azeri authorities to immediately
and unconditionally release Mr. Hilal Mammadov, in line with the UN WGAD
opinion, as his conviction and detention is a mere attempt to silence his
efforts to report human rights violations and defend minority rights in his
country. 