Chad:  Chad: Government forces children to join the armed forces
April 20, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / Chad / 2001 / AprilChad: Chad: Government forces children to join the armed forcesCHILD CONCERN Case TCD 201100.1.CC Follow-up to case TCD 201100.CC   The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information regarding the following situation in Chad.  New Information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source that the government in Chad keeps pressuring its own population in order to oblige children to join the armed forces. Families reportedly have to choose between accepting the recruitment of one of their children or participating in the “war effort” by paying a tax or donating a part of their crops.  In contrast, child abductions have almost disappeared.   Brief reminder of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT was informed by reliable sources of the forced recruitment of children into the armed forces situated in Northern Chad. Children were allegedly put on the front line in order to detect mines and if reluctant they were reportedly killed. These children were mainly under thirteen years old and belong to the Zagava ethnic group.  According to the information received, the recruitment was carried out by the Fast Intervention Forces -  (F.I.R.) headed by General Mahamat DERO -  belonging to the President Déby’s family, and by the Units of the Presidential Guard (G.S.P.) - headed by General Karim NASSOUR - son-in-law of the President. The two generals allegedly enjoy total impunity.  According to the information received, the arrests that preceded the forced recruitment of children, occurred daily, and took place at the sub-prefecture of Iriba, but also at roadblocks that check movement in and out of urban areas. Some arrests allegedly occurred at the Ndjaména roadblock and some parents of those recruited had reportedly been assaulted and even killed.  Remarks and actions requested  The International Secretariat of OMCT keeps being gravely concerned about the situation, and particularly about the physical and psychological integrity of the children and calls on the Government of Chad to take all necessary measures to put an end to the unlawful and arbitrary deprivation of children’s liberty and to their forced recruitment into the armed forces, in accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and taking into account the principles outlined in the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflicts.  Please write to the authorities in Tchad urging them to:  i.	guarantee the safety, the physical and psychological integrity of all children; ii.	put an immediate end to the arrest and forced recruitment of all children and especially those of the Zagava ethnic group; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards and in particularly the Convention on the Rights of the Child.  Addresses  Mr IDRISS DEBY, Président de la République  Présidence de la République, B.P. 74 N'Djamena Tchad Fax : (235)  51 45 01; Tél. (235) 51 44 37; Telex 5201 KD/ 5307 KD  Mr NAGOUM YAMASSOUM, Premier Ministre Primature  N'Djamena - TCHAD Fax (235) 52 20 89  Tél (235) 52 63 41  Telex 5351 KD  Le Général de Brigade ROUTOUANG YOMA GOLONG Ministre de la Justice, Garde des Sceaux Ministère de la Justice  BP. 426 N'Djaména - Tchad   Tél./Fax (235) 52 21 39  Mr Mahamat Saleh ANNADIF, Ministre des Affaires Etrangères et de la Coopération BP. 746 N'Djamena - Tchad  Tél 51 50 82  Telex 5238 KD  Mr Adéramane Moussa  Ministre de l'Intérieur, de la Sécurité et de la Décentralisation Ministère de l'Intérieur, N'Djaména - Tchad  Colonel Weideing Assi Assoué Ministre de la Défense Ministère de la Défense et de la Réinsertion Tél (235) 52 33 09 N'Djaména  Fax : (235) 52 65 44  Le Général de Brigade MORNADJI Chef d'Etat Major Général des Armées (CEMGA) Camp des Martyrs BP. 916 N'Djaména - Tchad  Tél/Fax : 52 38 11  Diplomatic representatives of Chad accredited to your country.  Geneva, 20 April 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply 