Azerbaijan:  Ongoing judicial harassments and deprivation of her lawyers against Ms. Leyla Yunus
November  6, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2014 / NovemberAzerbaijan: Ongoing judicial harassments and deprivation of her lawyers against Ms. Leyla Yunus
New information

AZE 002 / 0414 / OBS 031.4

		Judicial harassment / Deprivation of lawyers

Azerbaijan

		November 6, 2014

		 

		The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the 
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), has received new 
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation 
in Azerbaijan.

		 

New information:

		 

		The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing 
judicial harassments and the deprivation of her lawyers against Ms. 
Leyla Yunus, Director of the Institute for Peace and Democracy 
(IPD) and a member of OMCT General Assembly.

		 

		According to the information received, on October 29, 2014, Leyla Yunus 
was deprived of her lawyer, Javad Javadov. This decision follows Mr. 
Javadov’s active criticism of the judicial process against Leyla Yunus 
at a hearing on October 24, 2014. Mr. Javadov highlighted the lack of 
evidence-based decisions and the fact that the investigators have not 
visited Ms. Yunus even once during the detention period in a hearing, in 
which the Pre-trial Court decided to extend Ms. Yunus’ pre-trial 
detention until February 28, 2015. According to Mr. Javadov, the 
investigation allegedly related to a dismissal of the lawyer due to his 
conflict of interests as a witness on the case. However, the 
Prosecutor's Office has still not explained the reasons officially. In 
addition, the Observatory has just been informed that Mr. Khalid Bagirov, 
the second main lawyer of Ms. Leyla Yunus, has also been removed from her 
case.

		 

		In a similar situation, three out of four lawyers of human rights defender 
Mr. Intigam Aliyev (Messrs. Anar Qasymly, Alayif Hasanov 
and Fariz Namazly) have been excluded from his defense. This is due to the 
fact that lawyers are called as witnesses in the case.

		 

		Moreover, her other lawyer, Mr. Alayif Huseynov has been the subject of a 
lawsuit by Nuriya Huseynova – cellmate of Leyla Yunus - accusing him 
of passing information to Mass Media, reportedly about about the 
ill-treatment that Ms. Yunus is facing in prison. The trial on the case 
started on September 29 at the Sabunchu District Court of Baku city. 
Besides, the Observatory was also informed that on October 24, 2014, the 
pre-trial detention of Leyla Yunus was extended until February 28, 2015. 
Similarly, on October 29, 2014, the pre-trial detention of her husband and 
co-defender Mr. Arif Yunusov, also was extended until March 
5, 2015.

		 

		Against the background of continuing hate speeches against Ms. Yunus, the 
Vice-Director of the Institute of History of National Academy of Sciences, 
Mr. J. Bahramov, announced on October 17 that the Institute was discussing a 
possible deprivation of Ms. Yunus from her Ph.D., alleging that her thesis 
was a plagiarism.

		The Observatory recalls that these decisions come following strong 
international mobilisation on the case of Leyla Yunus and other Azeri human 
rights defenders on the occasion of the official visit to France of 
President Ilham Aliyev in France on October 27, 2014[1].

		 

		The Observatory recalls as stated in previous communications its serious 
concerns regarding the judicial harassment to both Ms. Leyla Yunus and her 
husband, Mr. Arif Yunusov.

		 

		The Observatory calls upon the authorities in Azerbaijan to ensure Ms. 
Leyla Yunus’ and Mr. Arif Yunusov’s physical and psychological 
integrity by providing adequate medical care as well as to release them 
immediately and unconditionally, as their detention seems to only aim at 
sanctioning their activities amidst a wave of increasing repression against 
civil society organisations and representatives in Azerbaijan.

		 

Background information:

		 

		On April 28, 2014, Ms. Leyla Yunus was reportedly invited as a witness on 
the criminal case of journalist Rauf Mirqadirov[2]to the Investigation Department of Serious 
Crimes of the Office of Prosecutor General of Azerbaijan. That evening, 
however, Ms. Yunus and Mr. Yunusov were detained at the Baku Heydar Aliyev 
airport where authorities confiscated their passports and seized a laptop 
and paper records as they were trying to fly to Paris via Doha, while 
denying Ms. Yunus and Mr. Yunusov the right to see their lawyer. An 
attempted search of the Yunus apartment later that night resulted in the 
hospitalisation of Mr. Yunusov for a pre-stroke condition.

		 

		The following morning, April 29, 2014, Ms. Yunus was taken to the 
Investigation Department of Serious Crimes of the General Prosecutor’s 
Office and interrogated for nine hours, including about joint projects of 
the IPD and Armenian NGOs as well as her relations with journalist Rauf 
Mirqadirov. Later that night, police searched the offices of the IPD as well 
as the Yunus’ private residence, confiscating several computers, 
books, and print materials.

		 

		Three months before her arrest, Ms. Leyla Yunus actively campaigned for 
the release of political prisoners and against the organisation of European 
Olympic Games in Baku. One day before her arrest, on July 29, 2014, she 
wrote a letter to the President of Azerbaijan, Mr. Ilham Aliyev, criticising 
the arrest of many critics of his regime and human rights defenders.

		 

		On July 30, 2014, the Prosecutor’s office employees arrested Ms. 
Leyla Yunus. She was charged with “treason” (Article 274 of the 
Criminal Code), “large-scale fraud” (Article (178.3.2), 
“forgery” (Article 320), “tax evasion” (Article 
213), and “illegal business” (Article 192), and sentenced to 
three months pre-trial detention. Mr. Arif Yunusov faced similar charges of 
“treason” and “fraud”, and was initially barred from 
traveling, but not jailed for health reasons. However, on August 5, 2014, 
the court eventually decided to arrest him too, and to place him in 
pre-trial detention for three months. The documents confiscated in April 
2014 were a ground for the accusations against Ms. Yunus and Mr. 
Yunusov.

		 

		Although the health of Ms. Leyla Yunus has deteriorated while in 
detention, the prison authorities in Kurdakhany detention facility have not 
allowed her to receive the parcels with medication she needs as she suffers 
from diabetes and kidneys problems. However, following the visit from 
delegates of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) on August 
12, 2014, she finally got her painkiller-injections. Yet she is still not 
allowed to be hospitalised.

		 

		On September 6, 2014, her cellmate who verbally harassed her and threw 
plates and dishes at her attacked Leyla Yunus. Leyla Yunus started knocking 
at the door in order to call for help and when the staff from the prison 
arrived she reported the attack and asked to see the prison administration. 
She wrote three pages explaining the event and the previous acts of 
harassment conducted by her cellmate. Moreover, she also asked for medicine 
since she was feeling unwell after the attack but her demand was 
unattended.

		On September 7, 2014, she was brought before Major Yagubov who announced 
her that a reprimand had been issued against her for knocking at the door 
without any reason and creating unrest inside the cell. No measure has been 
taken to either punish the cellmate nor to ensure the protection of Leyla 
Yunus.

		 

		On October 18, the Azeri authorities decided to transfer 
Ms. Leyla Yunus to the Investigative Prison of 
the Ministry of National Security, where her husband 
Mr. Arif Yunusov has been detained since August 5. Ms. Yunus 
was held there until October 24, date in which she was transferred back to 
Kurdakhani prison. The Investigative Prison is the only remaining 
prison which is not subordinated to the Ministry of Justice. The Observatory 
recalls that various international human rights bodies such as the UN 
Committee Against Torture (CAT) or the European Committee for the 
Prevention of Torture (CPT) have expressed their concerns about the 
extreme levels of isolation of the detainees and the absence of a 
proper medical unit in this prison. The UN CAT has recommended 
this prison to be either transferred to the Ministry of Justice or 
to be closed down.

		 

		Mr. Arif Yunusov was also arrested on August 5, 2014 and placed in 
pre-trial detention for three months. He is also in great need of medical 
treatment. In April and May 2014, he got two heart attacks and consequently 
spent several weeks in hospital.

		 

Action requested:

		 

		Please write to the authorities in Azerbaijan, urging them to:

		 

		i.       Guarantee Ms. Yunus’ right to 
defense by ending Yunus’ deprivation of her lawyers and put an end to 
the practice of depriving human rights defenders of their lawyers by calling 
them as witnesses of the cases.

		 

		ii.      Guarantee in all circumstances the 
physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Leyla Yunus, Mr. Arif Yunusov 
and all human rights defenders in Azerbaijan;

		 

		iii.     Immediately and unconditionally release Ms. 
Leyla Yunus and Mr. Arif Yunusov from pre-trial detention, as well as all 
the other arbitrarily arrested human rights defenders, since their 
detentions are arbitrary and only aim at sanctioning their human rights 
activities;

		 

		iv.     Put an end to any kind of harassment - 
including at the judicial and investigatory levels - against Ms. Leyla 
Yunus, Mr. Arif Yunusov, and more generally against all human rights 
defenders in Azerbaijan;

		 

		v.      Conform with the provisions of the UN 
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of 
the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially:

		-       Article 1, which states that 
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, 
to promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights 
and fundamental freedoms at the national and international 
levels”;

		-       Article 5, which underscores the 
right of every individual to form, join, and participate in non-governmental 
organizations; and

		-       Article 12.2, which provides that 
the State shall “take all necessary measures to ensure the protection 
by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association 
with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure 
adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a 
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of his or her 
rights”;

		 

		vi.     Ensure in all circumstances respect for human 
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human 
rights standards and international instruments ratified by Azerbaijan.

		 

Addresses:

		 

		·       Mr. Ilham Aliyev, President 
of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Office of the President of the Republic of 
Azerbaijan, 19 Istiqlaliyyat St., Baku AZ1066, Azerbaijan, Fax: (+994) 12 
492 06 25, (+994) 412 92 28 68, E-mail: 
office@pa.gov.az, 
office@apparat.gov.az

		·       Mr. Zakir Garalov, Prosecutor 
General of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Prosecutor’s Office, 7 Nigar 
Rafibeyli St., Baku, Azerbaijan, Fax: (+994) 12 492 06 82, (+994) 12 492 26 
63, E-mail: 
z.qaralov@prosecutor.gov.az, 
info@prosecutor.gov.az

		·       Mr. Eldar Mahmudov, Minister 
of National Security, Ministry of National Security of the Republic of 
Azerbaijan, Parliament Avenue 14, Baku AZ1006,Azerbaijan, Fax: (+994) 12 
493-76-22, E-mail: cpr@mns.gov.az

		·       Mr. Ramil Usubov, Minister of 
Internal Affairs, Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Azerbaijani Republic, 
Fax: (+994) 12 492 45 90

		·       Mr. Elmar 
Mammadyarov,Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the 
Republic of Azerbaijan, E-mail: 
katiblik@mfa.gov.az

		·       Mr. Fikrat F. Mammadov, 
Minister of Justice in Azerbaijan, Inshaatchilar Prospekti, 1 Baku, 
Azerbaijan, e-mail: 
contact@justice.gov.az; Fax (+994) 12 430 09 81

		·       H.E. Mr. Murad N. Najafbayli, 
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Azerbaijan to the United Nations in Geneva, 
Route des Fayards 237, CH-1290 Versoix, Switzerland, Fax: (+41) 22 901 18 
44, E-mail: 
geneva@mission.mfa.gov.az

		·       Embassy of Azerbaijan in 
Brussels, Avenue Moliere 464, 1050 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: (+32) 2 345 91 
85

		 

		Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Azerbaijan in 
your respective country as well as to the EU diplomatic missions or 
embassies in Azerbaijan.

		 

		***

		Geneva-Paris, November 6, 2014

		 

		Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal 
in your reply.

		 

		The Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the protection 
of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their 
time of need.

		 

		To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:

			E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org


		·         Tel and fax OMCT 
+ 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29

		·         Tel and fax FIDH 
+ 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80




[1]

				                        
[1]See Joint Open Letter from from October 27, 2014.

				 


[2]

				                        
[2]Mr. Rauf Mirqadirov was deprived journalist accreditation in Turkey 
without any formal reason, deported to Azerbaijan and arrested on his 
arrival to Baku on April 19, 2014 on charges of spying for Armenia. This 
procedure permits to avoid a process of extradition and leaves no 
opportunity for appeal. 