Azerbaijan:  OMCT Campaign: Freedom for Leyla and Arif Yunus!   #FreeTheYunus
July 15, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2015 / JulyAzerbaijan: OMCT Campaign: Freedom for Leyla and Arif Yunus!   #FreeTheYunusOMCT welcomes the release on probation of Azerbaijani human rights defender and OMCT General Assembly member Leyla Yunus and her husband Arif Yunusov after nearly one year and a half of arbitrary detention and seriously deteriorating health.THANK YOU TO EVERYONE WHO TOOK ACTION TO #FreeTheYunus  !!Latest Updates on the case of Leyla and Arif Yunus- April 19, 2016: Press Release: Leyla and Arif Yunus finally out of the country to receive urgent medical treatment- March 18, 2016: Urgent Appeal: Court decision forbidding Leyla Yunus and Arif Yunusov to travel abroad to receive medical treatment- December 11, 2015: Press Release: Great Relief as OMCT General Assembly Member Leyla Yunus is released on probation- December 10, 2015: Press Release: Leyla Yunus released on probation!- December 10, 2015: Statement by HRDN: HRDN Stand 4 Human Rights Defenders Campaign: Statement following release of Leyla and Arif Yunus- December 10, 2015: Statement by Civic Solidarity
Platform and the Sports For Rights Campaign: Suspension of sentences of Leyla and Arif Yunus is a welcome step, but justice is still elusive- November 13, 2015: Urgent Appeal: Measure of restraint against Mr. Arif Yunusov changed from detention to conditional release for the period of appeal- November 10, 2015: Urgent Appeal: New developments in the trial against Leyla and Arif Yunus and potential acts of ill-treatment against Leyla Yunus- October 28, 2015: Urgent Appeal: New developments concerning the appeal trial against Ms. Leyla Yunus and Mr. Arif Yunusov- October 27, 2015: OMCT Joint Shadow Report to the Committee Against Torture (CAT): Joint Shadow Report to the Committee against Torture- October 16, 2015: Press Release: Time for justice in the case against Leyla and Arif Yunus- August 14, 2015: Press Release Sport For Rights Campaign: Sport for Rights coalition condemns conviction of human rights defenders Leyla and Arif Yunus- August 13, 2015: Press Release: Verdict against Leyla and Arif Yunus is outrageous and must be nullified- August 10, 2015: Urgent Appeal: Developments in the ongoing trial against Leyla and Arif Yunus- August 7, 2015: Press Release: Prosecutor requests outrageous jail sentences for Leyla and Arif Yunus- August 3, 2015: Urgent Appeal: Trial against Leyla Yunus and Arif Yunusov: Fainting of Mr. Yunusov and hurdles to trial observers- July 31, 2015: Urgent Appeal: New developments in the first trial against Ms. Leyla Yunus and Mr. Arif Yunusov- July 30, 2015: Sport for Rights Coalition: Statement: Anniversary of human rights defender’s arrest marks one year of unprecedented repression in Azerbaijan- July 16, 2015: Urgent Appeal: Reporting on the first hearing of the trial against Leyla and Arif.- July 10, 2015: Press Release: Trial against Ms. Leyla and Mr. Arif Yunus to open after a year in custodyProfiles:Ms. Leyla Yunus,

Director of the Institute for Peace and Democracy
(IPD) and a member of OMCT General Assembly, has long fought for human rights and the rights of ethnic minorities in Azerbaijan. She has been heading the IPD since 1995. In October 2014, Ms. Leyla
Yunus was awarded the Polish Prize of Sérgio Vieira de Mello, and was among the
three finalists for the Sakharov Prize. She also received the distinction of
“Chevalier de l’Ordre National de la Légion d’Honneur” from the French
government in 2013. She has worked on numerous projects relating to human
rights, political persecution, corruption, human trafficking, gender-based
issues and violations of the right to property. Ms. Yunus and Messrs. Intigam Aliyev and Rasul Jafarov were all members of a group compiling a list of
political prisoners in Azerbaijan.
Ms. Leyla Yunus and her husband,
Mr. Arif Yunusov, 

Head of the Conflictology Department of IPD,



 have also worked towards reconciliation between Azerbaijan and
Armenia, two countries divided on the conflict in the Nagorno-Karabakh region.
Ms. Leyla Yunus has been involved since 2005 in the “Track II Diplomacy”
Initiative, and initiated the project of a dialogue between Azeri and
Armenians, developed jointly with a regional research centre in Armenia. 
On April 28,
2014, Ms. Leyla Yunus was reportedly invited as a witness on the criminal
case against journalist Rauf Mirqadirov, columnist and press correspondent
in Turkey for the independent newspaper Zerkalo, to the Investigation
Department of Serious Crimes of the Office of Prosecutor General of
Azerbaijan. In the evening, however, Ms. Yunus and Mr. Yunusov were
detained at the Baku Heydar Aliyev airports. The authorities seized their
luggages, conducted a search without presenting them any court order,
confiscated their passports and seized a laptop, a video camera, USB
flash drives and paper records, while denying Ms. Yunus and Mr. Yunusov
the right to see their lawyer. Mr. Yunusov was hospitalised for a
pre-stroke condition.
On April 29,
2014, after being kept awake the whole night and denied access
to toilets, Ms. Yunus was interrogated in relation to the case against
journalist Rauf Mirqadirov, who
 had been extradited the day before from Turkey to Azerbaijan and was 
arrested upon his arrival in Baku and placed in detention on charges of 
spying for Armenia. 
Ms. Yunus’
questioning lasted nine hours, and questions all focused on joint projects
between the IPD and Armenian NGOs, as well as on her relations with journalist
Rauf Mirqadirov. Following this questioning, IPD’s premises were searched and
authorities seized all the computers and books belonging to Mr. Yunusov, along
with printed documents, including the business card of an Armenian historian.
Shortly after, IPD’s bank accounts were frozen. Ms. Yunus and Mr. Yunusov were released.
On July 30, 2014,
Ms. Yunus was arrested again by the the Prosecutor’s office employees on
charges of “treason” (Article 274 of the Criminal Code), “large-scale fraud”
(Article (178.3.2), “forgery” (Article 320), “tax evasion” (Article 213), and
“illegal business” (Article 192) and brought to the department of grave crimes
of the General Prosecutor’s Office, where she had to undergo a six-hour
questioning. Informed by telephone, her husband joined her at the department of
grave crimes of the General Prosecutor’s Office, where he was also questioned.
Ms. Yunus and Mr. Yunusov were both charged, and then placed in pre-trial
detention. Mr. Yunusov was later placed under house arrest, and arrested again
on August 5, for violation of his conditional sentence. Since that date, Mr.
Arif Yunusov has been held at the Investigative Prison of the Ministry of
National Security, the only remaining prison in Azerbaijan which is not
subordinated to the Ministry of Justice. This situation puts him at a high risk
of facing torture and ill treatment and the absence of a proper medical unit in
this prison has been denounced by various international human rights bodies
such as the UN Committee Against Torture (CAT) or the European Committee for
the Prevention of Torture (CPT).
Following
international criticism over the conditions of detentions, the Azeri
authorities agreed for Ms. Yunus to be examined on various occasions since
December 2014 by a German doctor, Christian Witt, whose official results have
not been made public so far. Ms. Yunus’ lawyer, who visited her on February 8,
reported that she was preoccupied over the lack of information about the
doctor’s diagnosis, that she was suffering from sight problems, and that she
was continuing to lose weight. Ms. Yunus, who was previously denied access to
medication by the prison authorities, allegedly lost 16 kilograms since her
arrest. 
On October 18,
2014, Ms. Leyla Yunus was transferred to the Investigative Prison of the
Ministry of National Security. Ms. Yunus was held there until October 24,
date on which she was transferred to Kurdakhani prison.
On September 6,
2014, Ms. Leyla Yunus's cell-mate who had previously verbally harassed her
and thrown plates and dishes at her, assaulted Ms. Leyla Yunus. Ms. Leyla Yunus
called for help and when the staff from the prison arrived she reported the
attack and asked to see the prison administration. She wrote three pages
explaining the event and the previous acts of harassment conducted by her
cell-mate. Moreover, she also asked for medicine since she was feeling unwell
after the attack but her demand was unattended. On September 7, 2014, she was
brought before Major Yagubov who announced her that a reprimand had been issued
against her for knocking at the door without any reason and creating unrest
inside the cell. No measure has been taken to either punish the cell-mate nor
to ensure the protection of Ms. Leyla Yunus.
Ms. Leyla Yunus
was later deprived of her lawyer, Mr. Javad Javadov, following his
criticism of the judicial process against Ms. Leyla Yunus at an hearing on
October 24, 2014. A few days later, her second lawyer, Mr. Khalid
Bagirov, was also removed from the case. Moreover, her third lawyer,
Mr. Alaif Hasanov, has been subjected to a lawsuit by Ms. Nuriya Huseynova
- cellmate of Leyla Yunus – who accused him of passing information to the
media. Mr. Alaif Hasanov was the first one to speak out about the
condition and physical pressure against Ms. Leyla Yunus via
her cell-mate.
On January 5,
2015 and February 2, 2015, the ECtHR communicated on two applications filed for
violations of the rights of Ms. Leyla Yunus and Mr. Arif Yunusov .
On February 18,
2015, the pre-trial detention of Ms.Yunus was extended until July 28, 2015, and on February 23,
2015, the pre-trial detention of Mr. Yunusov was extended to August 5, 2015.The first trial against them started on July 15.GENERAL INFORMATION ON THE CRACKDOWN ON HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS IN AZERBAIJAN

As
Azerbaijan was chairing the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe,
summer 2014 was characterised by an unprecedented crackdown on civil society,
NGOs, human rights defenders and journalists. Prominent and internationally
recognised human rights defenders joined other political prisoners in Azeri
jails. Those are: Ms. Leyla Yunus (Director of the Institute of Peace
and Democracy (IPD) and a member of OMCT General Assembly), Mr. Arif Yunus
(Head of the Conflictology Department of IPD), Mr. Intigam Aliyev (Head
of the Legal Education Society), and Mr. Rasul Jafarov. They were
all sentenced to pre-trial detention on criminal charges such as “treason”
(Article 274 of the Criminal Code), “large-scale fraud” (Article (178.3.2),
“forgery” (Article 320), “tax evasion” (Article 213), and “illegal business”
(Article 192) or “abuse of authority” (Article 308.2). Mr. Intigam Aliyev and
Mr. Rasul Jafarov are currenly serving a 7.5 and 6.5-year prison sentence
respectively on very similar and equally spurious charges to those against the
Yunus of tax evasion, illegal entrepreneurship, and abuse of power following
the trials against them that started in January 2015.
Others
now await trial. Later, on December 5, 2014, Ms. Khadija Ismailova, an
investigative journalist widely known for looking into corruption, was arrested
under spurious charges of incitement to suicide.
All of
the above thus joined the already imprisoned defenders Mr. Anar
Mammadli (Chairperson of the Election Monitoring and Democracy Studies
Centre, EMDSC) and Mr. Bashir Suleymani (Executive Director of
EMDSC). In May 2014 they were sentenced by the Court on Grave Crimes to
respectively to 5,5 years’ and 3,5 years’ imprisonment on charges of or “tax
evasion”, “illegal entrepreneurship”, and “abuse of authority”. On March 19,
2015, Mr. Bashir Suleymanli was released after President Ilham Aliyev signed an
annual presidential pardon.
This
repression of individuals in Azerbaijan had been preceded by new legislative
acts targeting civil society and NGOs. New anti-NGO laws, adopted in 2014,
provide the authorities with additional powers for temporary suspension and
permanent banning of national and foreign NGOs, and introduce additional
administrative requirements and increased checks. Non-registered NGOs cannot be
considered recipients of grants any more. While working under non-registered
grants is an administrative offence, the courts now tend to consider such funds
as personal income in an attempt to persecute their recipients for tax evasion
under criminal law. In addition, the bank accounts of several NGOs and
representatives were frozen upon request of the General Prosecutor’s Office,
including those of the Media Rights Institute, the Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights Public Union, the Democracy and Human Rights Resource Center, the
Azerbaijan Lawyers Association, and the Center for National and International
Studies. To sum up, the new laws have allowed the government to cut off funding
of NGOs by arbitrarily freezing bank accounts of organisations and their
leaders, while making it obligatory and impossible to register new grants. 
The
situation of journalists is similarly dire. Mr. Emil Huseynov, the head
of the leading media rights NGO, Institute for Reporters' Freedom and Safety,
went into hiding as the offices were raided by the police on 8 August 2014. On
June 13, 2015, the day after the opening ceremony of the Baku Games, the Swiss
Minister of Foreign Affairs (who attended the ceremony) left Azerbaijan with
Mr. Huseynov. The latter is now relocated in Switzerland.
The
Observatory had previously mobilised especially on the case of Mr. Hilal
Mammadov, a defender of the rights of the Talysh ethnic minority and
Editor-in-chief of the Tolishi-Sado (Voice of Talysh) newspaper. He was
arrested on June 21, 2012, and sentenced to five years in prison following
unfair proceedings lodged on the basis of spurious criminal offences relating
to “illegal selling of drugs”, “high treason”, and “incitement to national,
racial, social and religious hatred and hostility”. Mr. Mammadov has remained
detained since then. In its November 2013 opinion on the case, the UN Working
Group on Arbitrary Detention concluded that “the charges of treason and incitement to national, racial, social and
religious hatred and hostility are based on Mr. Mammadov’s legitimate
exercise of the right of freedom of expression (…)” and requested his
immediate release with compensation. 
The situation of
human rights defenders, activists and journalists in Azerbaijan has been
deteriorating already since early 2011, when hundreds of pro-democracy
demonstrators took to the streets. They were outnumbered by security forces,
dozens of activists were detained, as the authorities clearly feared an Arab
Spring-like revolution. A widespread repression of civil activists, opposition
members and journalists was launched by the authorities. Ahead of the
presidential elections of October 2013, the crackdown even intensified,
accompanied by new repressive laws to further stifle civil society. Physical
attacks against opposition members, ill-treatment in prison of human rights
defenders, judicial harassment and violent repression of demonstrators
increased.RESSOURCES- April 20, 2015: OBS Fact-Finding Mission Report: "AZERBAIJAN: Crackdown on Human Rights Defenders intensifies as Baku Games approach"- June 11, 2015: OBS Publication of a trial observation report: "If you can’t beat them, jail them": The case of Human 
Rights Defender Rasul Jafarov".- June 11, 2015: OBS Press Release on the eve of the Opening of the Baku Games: "Azerbaijan: Gold medal on repression in the run-up to the Baku Games"- June 24, 2015: OBS Statement at the 29th Session of the United Nations Human Rights Council on the situation of Human Rights Defenders in Azerbaijan.- For all Urgent Appeals, Press Releases and Statements on Azerbaijan please click here.Sport
 for Rights' campaign, of which OMCT is member, has been established to 
raise the problem of political prisoners in the context of the 
forthcoming international sporting events to be hosted by Azerbaijan. Click here for more information on the activities of the Sport For Rights campaign. 