Oral Statement by the OMCT: 61 Human Rights Commission, Item 10 - ESCR
April 11, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Statements / 2005 / AprilOral Statement by the OMCT: 61 Human Rights Commission, Item 10 - ESCRWorld Organization against Torture (OMCT) Statement to the 61st session of the Commission on Human Rights relating to Agenda Item 10 Economic, Social and Cultural Rights  Mr. / Mme Chair,  	The World Organization Against Torture thanks the Commission for the opportunity to address it in connection with its discussion of economic, social and cultural rights.    Economic, social and cultural rights and torture  OMCT, which for over 20 years has fought to eliminate torture, is also deeply concerned by violations of economic, social and cultural rights. This is because not only do they severely damage the lives of millions of people across this planet, in rich and poor countries alike, but such violations are intimately connected with torture and other forms of violence. For those wishing to eliminate torture, it is also important to address the conditions which lead to torture and make it possible.   Study of the structural causes of violence  In this context, OMCT is currently carrying out a project in collaboration with the University of Geneva  (Geneva International Academic Network) aimed at analysing the impact that the lack of enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights has on torture, and other forms of violence, including community and domestic violence.  An academic study is now under way to be followed later this year by an international conference aimed at devising a plan of action to address violence through its economic, social and cultural root causes.  The initial results of the study are eloquent; there is a significant link between poverty and the failure of other economic, social and cultural rights and torture and a wide range of other forms of violence. We also have much to do in order to adequately address the economic, social and cultural root causes of torture  OMCT is confident that the results of this project will assist the Commission and other UN human rights bodies in the struggle to eliminate torture.   Extreme poverty Social exclusion and extreme poverty are particularly importance as elements in deep and wide spread human rights violations of all kinds. That is why OMCT strongly supports the work of the Special Rapporteur on Extreme Poverty and Human Rights, and the Sub-Commission and its working group.   OMCT welcomes the Sub-Commission’s call to strengthen the participation of the poorest people in policy-making and in particular its call for regional seminars with people living in extreme poverty and those working with them, in order to identify the fundamental elements which should appear in an international text on extreme poverty and human rights. We must speak out clearly against extreme poverty on ethical and legal grounds alike.    Draft optional protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights  OMCT welcomes the progress made by the Commission’s open-ended working group.  OMCT urges the Commission to authorize the working group to begin drafting an optional protocol which should be comprehensive in scope, provide for individual and collective communications and the other elements set out by the NGO coalition for the optional protocol.  OMCT wishes to thank the members of the Commission for their attention.    Geneva, 29 March 2005 