The Observatory: Contribution to the 2011 OSCE Human Dimension Implementation Meeting (September 26 - October 7, 2011)
September 27, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2011 / SeptemberThe Observatory: Contribution to the 2011 OSCE Human Dimension Implementation Meeting (September 26 - October 7, 2011) 
2011 OSCE Human Dimension Implementation Meeting
September 26 - October 7, 2011
 Written contribution of
The International Federation of Human Rights (FIDH) 
and
The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
 


Within the framework of their joint programme,The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
  
Under working session 3 of the agenda on “Fundamental Freedoms”
September 27, 2011
 
 
English / Russian version
 The International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of their joint programme, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, wish to draw the attention of the Organisation for the Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) on the situation of human rights defenders in some OSCE Participating States.

In 2010 and 2011, human rights defenders in Eastern Europe and Central Asia continued to operate in a difficult, often hostile and dangerous environment. The climate of impunity that continued to reign for serious human rights violations and crimes under international law threatened independent human rights work and the ability of human rights defenders to document abuse. The lack of accountability and respect for the rule of law remained acute in Uzbekistan, Georgia, Kyrgyzstan and the Russian Federation, especially in the autonomous Chechen Republic and in Ingushetia, where arbitrary detentions, extrajudicial executions, enforced disappearances, torture and other forms of ill-treatment continued to be accompanied with impunity. In an environment of limited judicial independence and executive interferences into the judiciary there was insufficient protection against the arbitrary use of powers. International remedies remained therefore in many of the countries in the region the only feasible avenue for vindicating their rights effectively. This was particularly evident in relation to the role of the security and intelligence services that factually operate outside an effective system of checks and balances.
 
The period was marked by the further consolidation of authoritarian rule in the region (Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan). The situation particularly deteriorated in Belarus, where the presidential elections held on December 19 ended up in a violent crackdown against the opposition and the civil society. Ukraine further moved to authoritarian rule with allegations of a number of politically motivated persecutions. In addition, in the context of the democratic transitions in North Africa, the authorities of countries in the region started to react particularly strongly to the exercise of the right to freedom of assembly. In Azerbaijan and Georgia, anti-governmental protests in 2011 were followed by a wave of politically-motivated acts of repression and crackdowns on peaceful demonstrators. 
 
Furthermore, the authorities in the region used a variety of means, including restrictive legal frameworks, to limit freedom of expression through licensing regulations, Internet restrictions and other forms of media control. Independent media outlets were subjected to interferences and in some cases closed (Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan).
 
The influence by the international community on countries of the region (Belarus, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan) has led to no significant improvement. In Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan, the economic and security interests continued to limit the pressure to improve the human rights situation. Moreover, the proximity to war-zones of Afghanistan and the presence of foreign military bases was another reason for the development of cooperation with the West. After a thaw in relations with Belarus since 2008, the European Union imposed sanctions against the country at the beginning of 2011 as a response to the post-electoral wave of repression. The pressure against human rights defenders, however, continued. Although the international community had high expectations of Kazakhstan’s 2010 Chairmanship of the OSCE, it brought no improvements to the human rights situation. The authorities introduced on the contrary a series of measures restricting freedoms of the Internet and the media and protecting the officials from defamation, and the President from any prosecution.
 
Obstacles to human rights defenders’ freedoms of association and peaceful assembly
 
In 2010-2011, the authorities in the region continued to resort to a variety of restrictive laws to impede the work of human rights defenders with the aim to control civil society organisations and by lending to the arbitrary use of powers. This included laws on non-governmental organisations (NGOs), tax laws and assembly laws. National security laws and policies also continued to impose a restrictive framework for human rights defenders’ activities, including counter-terrorism or extremism laws. In Belarus, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan, human rights NGOs continued to work without official registration, risking prosecution under the Criminal Code (Belarus). In Azerbaijan, the Government put in place stricter rules for registering NGOs. The authorities of Georgia also tightened control over the NGOs working on issues related to South Ossetia and Abkhazia in the context of the post-war with the Russian Federation. In some countries (Azerbaijan, Georgia, the Russian Federation), State control over the funding of the NGOs, and the multiple attempts by the authorities to discourage and frustrate them from receiving funding from foreign donors was a way to hamper civil society’s activities. In Ukraine, although the legal framework in which human rights defenders operated remained restricted, a draft law on freedom of association discussed by the Parliament could improve the registration of NGOs. Turkmen human rights defenders were for their part on several occasions denied access to OSCE meetings dedicated to human rights by the Kazakhstan Chairmanship, because the Turkmen authorities objected their participation.
 
Throughout the region, it also remained difficult to organise and hold peaceful meetings dedicated to human rights issues. In Armenia, while a new Law on Assembly was adopted in 2011, freedom of assembly often remained limited in practice. A draft Law on Peaceful Assemblies was also adopted at first reading in Ukraine, providing for a number of improvements while falling still short of international standards, and several peaceful rallies held in favour of the defence of human rights were repressed. In Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, the Russian Federation and Belarus, it remained practically impossible to obtain permission from the authorities to hold a peaceful meeting. Human rights defenders taking part in peaceful assemblies also faced acts of violence perpetrated by law-enforcement authorities, arrested, and sometimes imprisoned or fined (Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, the Russian Federation, Uzbekistan). In Uzbekistan the fines were so heavy that human rights defenders could not pay them.
 
Increasing pressure on human rights defenders in the context of elections and of internal violence
 
In 2010-2011, election periods led to an increase of interferences and threats to human rights defenders, who were easily and often falsely equated with the opposition and subsequently subjected to hindrances and acts of harassment. The pressure on defenders particularly increased in Belarus following the December elections. In Azerbaijan, defenders were particularly exposed after the November 2010 elections. In Kyrgyzstan, the environment after the ethnic clashes in the south of the country remained extremely volatile for human rights defenders. Those who monitored human rights violations committed during the clashes and worked to protect the Uzbek minority were particularity subjected to harassment. The climate of national security threats also led to the portrayal of human rights defenders as unpatriotic and as threatening national security and stability (Belarus, Georgia, Kyrgyzstan). Moreover, in a number of countries of the region the climate for human rights defenders either renders rigorous human rights work difficult or leads to levels of self-restrain or self-censorship on sensitive human rights issues.
 
Judicial harassment of human rights defenders throughout the region and ill-treatment in detention
 
Throughout the region, human rights defenders continued to be subjected to judicial harassment and arbitrary detentions as reprisals for their activities (Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan). Uzbekistan remained the country with the highest number of human rights defenders serving long prison sentences, most often in strict regime colonies. Furthermore, due to the poor conditions of prison facilities and acts of ill-treatments against them, in most cases their health drastically deteriorated. In Turkmenistan, the exact number of political prisoners and prisoners of conscience, including human rights defenders, remained unknown as the prisons remained closed to international and local observers. In Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and the Russian Federation, some human rights defenders also continued to serve their sentences often with allegations of ill-treatment in detention. Some of them were refused parole or applications for early release (Kazakhstan, the Russian Federation, Uzbekistan). 
 
Assaults and threats left unpunished
 
In 2010 and 2011, human rights defenders faced threats and assaults from both State and non-State actors in several countries of the region (Georgia, Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan). Turkmen human rights defenders working in exile reported death threats and harassment by the authorities. In both Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan, human rights defenders’ families and acquaintances were frequently threatened. In several countries such as the Russian Federation, Ukraine and Uzbekistan, human rights defenders were physically abused. Some attacks were carried out by - or in the presence of - law enforcement authorities. In the Russian Federation, human rights defenders were targeted in connection to the investigation of environmental degradations and alleged corruption. In addition, activists defending the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people (LGBT) as well as combating discrimination and racism were again victims of violence by neo-Nazi groups. Defenders documenting cases of corruption were also targeted in Georgia, Tajikistan and Ukraine, where a journalist disappeared. In most of the cases these threats and attacks were not investigated. In the Russian Federation, only one out of the several cases of assassination of human rights defenders reached to the hearing stage resulting in a final verdict.
 
Ongoing surveillance and defamation campaigns against human rights defenders
 
Human rights defenders were also subjected to ongoing surveillance and defamation campaigns. In Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic and in Azerbaijan in general, but also in the Chechen Republic (Russian Federation), Belarus, Georgia, Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan, human rights defenders were subjected to defamation campaigns orchestrated by the authorities. Some were stigmatised as “enemies of the people” (Kyrgyzstan), “traitors” and “Russian spies” (Georgia), “enemies” and “Armenians” (Azerbaijan), as “working for Western donors” and “lobbying sanctions against the authorities” (Belarus), as “minorities protectors” and “anti-Russian” (Russian Federation), and as “traitors” and “terrorists” (Uzbekistan). Such defamation campaigns aimed at discouraging human rights defenders to carry out their activities and to encourage violence against them by the population. 
 
Human rights defenders were also put under strict surveillance in almost all countries of the region. Their ability to communicate freely was particularly undermined in Azerbaijan, Belarus, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan, as their phone lines were tapped and their e-mails controlled. In addition, during the presidential election campaign in Belarus, human rights defenders - especially those monitoring the elections - were subjected to long checks at the border and confiscation of materials. Human rights defenders were also harassed by the customs in Azerbaijan and Uzbekistan.
 
Obstacles to freedom of movement of human rights defenders
 
A number of obstacles to human rights defenders’ freedom of movement were observed in 2010 and 2011 in some countries of the region. In Uzbekistan, security services regularly followed or put Tashkent-based human rights defenders under house arrest, or impeded those working in the regions from coming to the capital. In Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan, they were often denied the right to leave the country. One Turkmen journalist from RFE/RL who lives in exile was denied entry into his homeland. In these countries, the authorities were particular vigilant of people having contacts with foreigners. Belarus also ordered several Russian human rights defenders monitoring the human rights situation at the national level to leave the country.
 
АНАЛИЗ СИТУАЦИИ В РЕГИОНЕ: ВОСТОЧНАЯ ЕВРОПА И ЦЕНТРАЛЬНАЯ АЗИЯ
 
В 2010 и начале 2011 гг. правозащитники в странах Восточной Европы и Центральной Азии  продолжали работать в исключительно сложной, враждебной, а зачастую и опасной обстановке. 
 
Атмосфера полной безнаказанности царила в отношении серьезных нарушений прав человека и преступлений, предусмотренных международным правом, и это наносило серьезный урон работе правозащитников, они не могли эффективно документировать злоупотребления и правонарушения. Отсутствие уважения к верховенству закона оставалось все столь же острым в Узбекистане, Грузии, Кыргызстане и Российской Федерации, где особо следует отметить Чеченскую Республику и Ингушетию: произвольные задержания, внесудебные расправы, насильственные похищения, пытки и другие формы бесчеловечного обращения продолжали оставаться безнаказанными. В обстановке ограничений, налагаемых на судебную власть, и вмешательств исполнительной власти в работу судебных органов, по сути, некуда было обратиться за защитой от произвола властей. Единственным возможным прибежищем и механизмом эффективной защиты основных прав и свобод во многих странах региона оставались международные органы. Это особенно очевидно в ситуациях, где особая роль спецслужб   фактически попирает принципы и взаимозависимости, и взаимоограничения исполнительной, законодательной и судебной власти.  
 
Данный промежуток времени также характеризуется усилением консолидации авторитарных режимов в странах региона (Азербайджан, Беларусь, Грузия, Казахстан, Кыргызстан, Российская Федерация, Таджикистан, Туркменистан, Украина, Узбекистан). Здесь следует особо отметить ухудшение ситуации в Беларуси, где 19 декабря прошли президентские выборы, после которых в стране началось жестокое преследование и репрессии в адрес оппозиции и гражданского общества. В Украине заметно усилились авторитарные тенденций, которые ознаменовалось целым рядом политически мотивированных обвинений и преследований. Кроме того, в контексте демократических перемен в Северной Африке правительства стран региона начали обостренно  реагировать на отстаивание гражданами своих прав на свободу ассоциаций и объединений. В 2011 г. в Азербайджане и Грузии после антиправительственных акций протеста прокатилась волна политически мотивированных репрессий и различных ограничительных мероприятий.
 
В добавление к этому, правительства стран региона применяли различные средства, включая рестриктивные законодательные акты, для ограничения свободы волеизъявления, в частности, издавая новые нормативные документы о лицензировании деятельности, ограничении доступа к Интернету, другие формы нажима на СМИ. Независимые органы печати находились под контролем, их деятельности мешали, а иногда их просто закрывали (Беларусь, Казахстан, Кыргызстан, Таджикистан, Туркменистан).
 
Попытки международного сообщества оказать влияние на ситуацию в странах региона  (Беларусь, Туркменистан, Узбекистан) особым успехом не увенчались. Относительно Туркменистана и Узбекистана, соображения безопасности и экономические интересы различных стран продолжают ограничивать возможности влияния на правительства с целью улучшения ситуации с правами человека. К тому же, близость к театру военных действий в Афганистане и присутствие на территории иностранных военных баз – еще одна причина тесного сотрудничества со странами Запада. После начавшейся в 2008 г. «оттепели» в отношениях с Беларусью, Европейский Союз ввел новые санкции против страны в начале 2011 г. в ответ на начавшуюся после выборов волну репрессий, однако это не помогло в плане улучшения ситуации с правами человека или уменьшения нажима на правозащитников. Международное сообщество возлагало большие надежды на вступление Казахстана в 2010 г. на пост страны-председателя Организации по безопасности и сотрудничеству в Европе (ОБСЕ), однако никаких послаблений или улучшения ситуации с правами человека это не принесло. Наоборот, власти ввели целый ряд ограничений на свободу доступа в Интернет, свободу средств массовой информации, одновременно законодательно приняв положения о защите официальных лиц от диффамации, а Президента страны от любого вида преследования. 
 
Препятствия, с которыми сталкиваются правозащитники при реализации права на свободу ассоциаций и мирных собраний
 
В 2010-2011 гг. правительства стран региона продолжали принимать новые и применять старые  рестриктивные законодательные акты и чинили препятствия работе правозащитников,  контролируя организации гражданского общества, порой прибегая к произволу. Среди таких новых законов можно назвать законы о неправительственных организациях (НПО), положения о налогообложении и законы об общественных объединениях и собраниях. Законы о национальной безопасности и политическая линия по ее обеспечению продолжали способствовать введению ограничений деятельности правозащитников, включая законодательство о борьбе с терроризмом или экстремизмом. В Беларуси, Туркменистане и Узбекистане правозащитные НПО продолжали работать без официальной регистрации, подвергая себя риску судебного преследования по статьям Уголовного кодекса (Беларусь). В Азербайджане правительство ввело более жесткие правила регистрации НПО. Власти в Грузии также усилили контроль за работой НПО над проблемами, касающимися Северной Осетии и Абхазии в контексте сложившихся после войны с Российской Федерацией отношений. В некоторых странах (Азербайджан, Грузия, Российская Федерация)  правительство контролирует вопросы финансирования НПО, и власти прибегают к всевозможным ухищрениям для того, чтобы отбить у НПО желание получать финансирование от зарубежных доноров, таким образом, они чинят препятствия работе организаций гражданского общества. В Украине, несмотря на ограничительные положения законодательства, в соответствии с которым правозащитники обязаны строить свою работу, обсуждаемый в Верховной Раде Проект Закона Украины «Об общественных организациях» может улучшить условия регистрации НПО. Во время председательства Казахстана в ОБСЕ, правозащитникам Туркменистана неоднократно чинились препятствия по доступу на посвященные правам человека заседания ОБСЕ, на том лишь основании, что власти Туркменистана возражали против их присутствия. 
 
Во всех странах региона продолжали оставаться пролемой организация и проведение мирных собраний с целью обсуждения связанных с правами человека вопросов.  В Aрмении, например, несмотря на принятие в 2011 г. нового Закона «О свободе собраний», на практике реализовать это право зачастую было очень сложно. Законопроект «О порядке организации и проведения мирных собраний», одобренный Верховной Радой Украины в первом чтении, провозглашает целый ряд положительных изменений, однако все же не дотягивает до международных стандартов, и несколько мирных демонстраций в защиту прав человека были при этом жестко разогнаны. В Казахстане, Узбекистане, Беларуси также, как и раньше, было невозможно или очень трудно добиться разрешения властей на проведение мирного митинга. Правозащитники, которые принимали участие в мирных демонстрациях и митингах, сталкивались с проявлениями насилия со стороны правоохранительных органов, подвергались аресту, а иногда и наказанию в виде штрафов и лишения свободы (Азербайджан, Беларусь, Грузия, Российская Федерация, Узбекистан). В Узбекистане размер штрафов был настолько высок, что правозащитники были не в состоянии их оплатить. 
 
Усиление нажима на правозащитников в контексте выборов; акты насилия   
 
В 2010-2011 гг. во время и после проведения выборов положение правозащитников систематически  ухудшалось: власти больше вмешивались в их деятельность, угрожали  преследованиями, приравнивали их к оппозиции и на основании этого предъявляли всевозможные обвинения, не давая нормально работать. Особенно следует отметить усиление нажима на правозащитников в Беларуси после декабрьских выборов 2010 г.. В Азербайджане нажим усилился после выборов в ноябре 2010 г., а в Кыргызстане - после межэтнических столкновений   на юге страны, где обстановка продолжает оставаться крайне неустойчивой. Особо жестким репрессиям подверглись те правозащитники, которые занимались мониторингом нарушений прав человека в ходе этих столкновений, и на основании собранных фактов пытались защитить права узбекского меньшинства. Учитывая напряженную обстановку и угрозы национальной безопасности, правозащитников стали обвинять в отсутствии патриотизма, навешивая на них обвинения в подрыве национальной безопасности и стабильности (Беларусь, Грузия, Кыргызстан). Более того, во многих странах региона сложилась такая трудная обстановка для работы правозащитников, что они зачастую вынуждены осуществлять определенный уровень самоцензуры или самоконтроля, когда речь идет о чувствительных для власти вопросах, связанных с правами человека.
 
Судебное преследование правозащитников во всех странах региона и жестокое обращение с ними в местах лишения свободы
 
Во всех странах региона правозащитники продолжают оставаться жертвами судебного преследования  и произвольных задержаний в отместку за их деятельность (Азербайджан, Казахстан, Кыргызстан, Российская Федерация, Таджикистан, Туркменистан, Узбекистан). Узбекистан  продолжает занимать первое место среди стран региона по числу правозащитников, осужденных на долгие сроки лишения свободы, в большинстве случаев с отбытием наказания в колониях усиленного и строгого режимов.  Более того, учитывая крайне неблагоприятные условия в тюрьмах и колониях, проявления жестокого и бесчеловечного обращения с правозащитниками в местах лишения свободы, в большинстве случаев их состояние здоровья резко ухудшается. В Туркменистане до сих пор не обнародовано число политических заключенных и узников совести, включая правозащитников, а местных и международных наблюдателей к ним не допускают. В Казахстане, Кыргызстане и Российской Федерации некоторые правозащитники, отбывающие наказание в местах лишения свободы, продолжают подвергаться жестокому обращению. Некоторым отказывают в условно-досрочном освобождении или изменении режима содержания (Казахстан, Российская Федерация, Узбекистан). 
 
Отсутствие наказаний за угрозы и физическое насилие
 
В 2010 - начале 2011 гг. против правозащитников во многих странах региона (Грузия, Кыргызстан, Российская Федерация, Таджикистан, Туркменистан, Узбекистан, Украина) начали раздаваться угрозы, они столкнулись с применением насилия со стороны как органов власти, так и разных групп и группировок. Правозащитники Туркменистана, вынужденные находиться в изгнании, сообщали об угрозах, включая смертельные угрозы, и о преследовании со стороны властей страны. В Туркменистане и Узбекистане семьи, друзья и даже знакомые правозащитников также слышали постоянные угрозы в свой адрес. В некоторых странах, в частности, в Российской Федерации, Украине и Узбекистане, правозащитники становились жертвами физического насилия. Некоторые акты насилия совершались самими сотрудниками правоохранительных органов, или в их присутствии другими лицами. В Российской Федерации правозащитники, среди прочего, становились мишенью за то, что расследовали нарушения законов об охране окружающей среды и сведения о коррупции. Кроме того, защитники прав лесбиянок, геев, бисексуалов и трансгендеров (ЛГБТ) и активисты, выступающие против дискриминации и расизма, становились жертвами насилия со стороны неонацистских группировок. Нападения на журналистов и активистов, которые фиксировали случаи коррупции, имели место в Грузии, Таджикистане и Украине, где один из журналистов бесследно исчез. В большинстве ситуаций, когда жертвы сообщали об угрозах, никаких расследований не проводилось. В Российской Федерации только одно из нескольких заведенных дел по обвинению в убийстве правозащитников было заслушано в судебном заседании, и по делу был вынесен приговор. 
 
Слежка и организация клеветнических кампаний против правозащитников
 
За правозащитниками продолжали осуществлять слежку и организовывать против них и их деятельности клеветнические кампании. В Нахичеванской Автономной Республике и в Азербайджане 