Morocco:  Morocco:release of 24 Saharan political prisoners, including Mr. Sidi Mohamed Daddach
July 12, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Morocco / 2001 / JulyMorocco: Morocco:release of 24 Saharan political prisoners, including Mr. Sidi Mohamed DaddachCase MAR 050901.1 Follow-up to Case MAR 050901  Geneva, 7 December 2001  The International Secretariat of the OMCT requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Morocco/Western Sahara :  Brief description of the situation:  The Itnernational Secretariat of the OMCT has been informed through press release from European Office for Human Rights in Western Sahara (Bureau européen pour le respect des droits de l'homme au Sahara Occidental), of the release of 24 Saharan political prisoners, including Mr. Sidi Mohamed Daddach, on 7 November 2001, the result of an amnesty decreed by King Mohamed VI of Morocco.    Furthermore, reports from the Association of Families of Prisoners and Disappeared Persons (AFAPREDESA) reveal that the young Saharan political prisoner Malainin Abderraman was released on 9 November.  Mr Malainin Abderraman had been sentenced and held in the Souk Larbaa prison near to Kinetra.  Mr Dah Cheikh  and  Mr Moussamih Laârbi, both political prisoners who had finished their two-year sentences.    Despite these releases, AFAPREDESA claim that 526 Saharans are still missing, about whom nothing is known of their whereabouts.  The International Secretariat of the OMCT shares the joy of the political prisoners who have been released and of their families, and supports them in their struggle for the universal respect of human rights.  On the other hand, OMCT also shares the concerns voiced by AFAPREDESA for the arbitrary detentions and the repression that continue in the occupied areas, and is especially concerned about the reports of torture, degrading treatment and the obstacles to media and ONG access to the occupied zones.  Brief reminder of the Situation:  The International Secretariat of the OMCT received information form AFAPREDESA concerning the hunger strike carried out since 23 August 2001 by Mr Sidi Mohamed Daddach, imprisoned since 1976 and held at Boulemharez prison, in an act of supprot for the International Campaign for the release of Saharan Political Prisoners launched by the European Office for the Respect of Human Rights in Western Sahara.  The following prisoners underwent a 24 hour hunger strike in support of the movement : Mr Salek Bahaha, Mr Brahim Leghzal, Mr Brahim Mohamed El Hosein Rajaa, Mr  Mouloud El Hossein M’Barek, Mr Omar Yahdih Omar, Mr Mohamed El Moustapha El Hassan Bachir, Mr Salem El Bachir Ragragui.  (See OMCT Urgent Appeal MAR 050901).  Remarks :  The International Secretariat of the OMCT would like to extend its thanks to every institution, organisation and individual which intervened to achieve the above releases.   Requested Action:  Please write to the Moroccan Authorities urging them to:  i. take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of  all Western-Saharan acvtivists ii. order the immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges of all those political prisoners still detained or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iii. order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events, notably the allegations of the use of torture, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iv. guarantee adequate reparation to Mr Sidi Mohamed Daddach and all other victims; v. guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with international human rights standards.  Adresses  · Sa Majesté le Roi Mohammed VI, Palais Royal, Rabat, Maroc, Fax : 212 37 73 07 72  · M. Abderrahmane El Youssoufi, Premier Ministre, Bureau du Premier Ministre et Ministre de Affaires Etrangères, Et de la Coopération, Palais Royal, Rabat, Maroc, Fax : 212 37 76 91 95, 212 37 76 77 68  · M. Ahmed El Midaoui, Ministre de l’Intérieur, Quartier Administratif, Rabat, Maroc, Fax : 212 37 76 20 64  · M. Omar Azziman, Ministre de la Justice, Palais de la Mamounia, Rabat, Maroc, Fax : 212 37 73 07 72, 212 37 73 89 40, 212 37 73 27 10  · M. Mohamed Aujjar, Ministre des Droits de l’homme, Fax : 212 37 67.19.67  Please write to the diplomatic representations of Morocco in your respective countries.  Geneva, 7 December 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 