Kazakhstan:  Call to the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan not to sign into law the bill “On introducing changes and additions in some legislative acts of Republic of Kazakhstan regarding activities of the non-governmental organisations”
November 24, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Kazakhstan / 2015 / NovemberKazakhstan: Call to the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan not to sign into law the bill “On introducing changes and additions in some legislative acts of Republic of Kazakhstan regarding activities of the non-governmental organisations”20151123_Kazakhstan_Open_Letter_Nazarbaev_English2 pages / 166 KB​

JOINT OPEN LETTER - THE OBSERVATORY


Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev Abishevich
		President of the Republic of Kazakhstan

		 

Mr. Sultanov Kuanysh Sultanovich
		Chairman of the Human Rights Commission under
		the President of Kazakhstan

		 

		Astana-Geneva-Paris, November 24, 2015

Re: Call to the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan not to sign 
into law the bill “On introducing changes and additions in some 
legislative acts of Republic of Kazakhstan regarding activities of the 
non-governmental organisations”


		The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the 
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), together with the Kazakhstan 
International Bureau for Human Rights and Rule of Law (KIBHR) and the 
International Legal Initiative Public Foundation would like to call upon you 
not to sign the draft law “On introducing changes and additions in 
some legislative acts of Republic of Kazakhstan regarding activities of the 
non-governmental organisations" adopted by the Senate on November 5, 
2015, and now awaiting your promulgation.

		 

		The new bill aims at improving the institutional framework in charge of 
providing financial aid to civil society organisations (hereafter - CSOs). 
However, if implemented, the law would severely and unduly restrict the 
right to freedom of association and undermine Kazakhstan’s 
international human rights obligations.

		 

		Such concerns were raised on September 25, 2015, when more than 90 
Kazakhstani CSOs appealed on to you to guarantee that the draft law be 
revised and brought in line with national and international human rights 
standards. In addition, more than 600 local CSOs have raised concerns over 
the conformity of the bill with the right to freedom of association.

		 

		The UN Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly 
and association, the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights as 
well as the OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media expressed their 
concern about the restrictive nature of the bill severely violating the 
freedom and independence of associations.

		 

		The Observatory shares the concerns expressed by the international 
community and local CSOs and would like to draw your attention to the 
following:

		 

		1. The bill assigns a so-called “authorized body” – up 
to now, the Ministry of Culture and Sports has been acting as the 
“authorised body” - the power to fix rules on grant-making, 
control and monitor the implementation of grants, potentially including 
grants allocated by entities other than the State of Kazakhstan. Indeed, the 
vague wording of the bill allows for various interpretations of its 
provisions and increased state control over non-state grants.

		 

		2. The bill provides that the Ministry of Culture and Sports shall be 
responsible for setting up a database on which CSOs would be required to 
post information regarding their founders, funding sources and expenditures. 
Failure to register or to provide information within a given time frame as 
well as the provision of “incorrect information” is subject to 
warning, a fine of 160 EUR or the suspension of the CSO for up to three 
months for repeated infringements. As a consequence, the Ministry of Culture 
and Sports may decide under its own authority to suspend a CSO for failing 
to comply with requirements related to the database. Furthermore, under 
legislation already in force, the failure by a suspended CSO to redress a 
violation may lead to its liquidation.

		Local civil society organisations questioned the added value of the 
database pointing to the already extensive information that CSOs are 
required under laws in force to provide to the Ministry of Justice and the 
tax authorities. We therefore consider that the set-up of the new database 
contradicts the requirements provided in the OSCE and Venice Commission 
Guidelines on Freedom of Association stipulating that associations cannot be 
subject to a stricter control compared to private businesses . It is also a 
violation of the Constitution of Kazakhstan which protects the associations 
from discriminatory and unjustified supervision.   

		 

		3. The bill also provides a list of the types of activities eligible for a 
grant. Such list differs from the one provided for in the Law "On 
non-commercial organisations". Hence the bill contains conflicting 
notions of what activity might be eligible for receiving a grant and 
contradicts the existing legal legislation generating more legal 
uncertainty.

		 

		4. The bill provides for the set-up of a new grant-making body - the 
Operator - responsible to allocate and oversee the implementation of 
governmental and non-governmental grants. Unfortunately, the bill fails to 
specify how this body would function, such as its composition, 
accountability and the decision-making process within the Operator, 
etc. 

		 

		5. The bill is unclear as to whether grants awarded by international 
organisations, diplomatic missions or international not-for-profit 
organizations will fall under the competence of the Operator. Item 5 of 
Article 6-1 of the bill provides that grants regulated under the Tax Code 
will fall outside of the scope of its provisions. However, only 15 
international organisations are listed in the Tax Code.

		 
	6. The bill also provides for the extension of the scope of the Law 
“On state social service procurement” regulating relations 
between the state and CSOs receiving funds from the State to provide social 
services. If the amendments in question are adopted, the afore-mentioned law 
could also regulate the provision of any grants and awards to CSOs, whether 
private, public, international, foreign or domestic. The vagueness of the 
provisions allow for such interpretation. Hence the Law “On state 
social service procurement” could also regulate relations that it was 
not initially supposed to deal with. This would create more legal 
uncertainty as the latter relations are also regulated by a number of 
existing legislations.
	
		 


		If adopted, the bill will obstruct the functioning of non-governmental 
organisations in the country by introducing vague notions subject to 
discretionary interpretation. The bill also includes many contradictory 
provisions and new legal terms thereby adding unnecessary confusion and 
uncertainty into the legal framework governing CSOs. Finally, the bill 
unnecessarily imposes additional regulation and control over CSOs by the 
Ministry of Culture and Sports in addition to the existing accountability 
mechanisms enforced by the Ministry of Justice and the relevant tax 
authorities. Proposals submitted by local civil society organisations to 
improve the bill, to clarify its legal terminology and to bring it in line 
with existing regulations and Kazakhstan's international human rights 
obligations were disregarded by the Parliament.

		 

		We therefore urge the you not to sign the above-mentioned legislative 
initiative into law as it is likely to significantly restrict the space of 
human rights organisations.

		 

		We call on you to ensure that all human rights defenders can pursue their 
legitimate work without any further hindrances and sincerely hope that you 
will take these elements into account.

		 
	Yours sincerely,
	
		 
	Gerald STABEROCK         
          Karim 
LAHIDJI                                               
	OMCT Secretary General         
   FIDH 
President                                         
	
		 

		Roza AKYLBEKOVA         
          Aina SHORMANBAYEVA
		KIBHR 
President                         
International Legal Initiative Public Foundation 