Iran:  UN Human Rights Council: Joint statement under item 4 General debate
March 12, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Statements / Iran / 2013 / MarchIran: UN Human Rights Council: Joint statement under item 4 General debateJoint Statement - Item 4 1 page / 77 KB
Please check against delivery
HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL
22th
session (25 February 2013 -22 March 2013)
Item 4: General debate 
Oral statement
delivered by The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT),
a non-governmental organisation in
general consultative status in conjunction with the International Campaign for
Human Rights in Iran 
Thank
you, Mr. President, 
Our
organisations would like to express our deep concerns about the deteriorating
situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran, particularly with
regards to the continued large numbers of execution sentences implemented as
well as widespread practice of torture in Iranian detention centers and prisons
against peaceful dissidents and civil society activists.
We
are also extremely concerned at the rampant culture of impunity and lack of
accountability that protects and encourages acts of torture.
Mr.
President, the Islamic Republic of Iran is one of the leading countries
implementing execution sentences. According to the latest report of the Special
Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in Iran, Mr. Ahmed Shaheed, the
Iranian judiciary carried out at least 493 hangings in 2012 alone. There are
serious concerns regarding lack of due process and fair trial  standards leading to such large scale
executions. The implementation of execution sentences against juveniles is also
of particular concern and is a blatant violation of Iran’s international
obligations.
Moreover,
many executions are taking place in public and are widely publicized by the
state media. According to OHCHR, at least 55 public hangings took place in Iran
in 2012. We call on the Iranian government to immediately institute a
moratorium on death penalty, as a first step towards abolition of the death
penalty.
Iranian
authorities are also sanctioning use of torture against detainees and prisoners
on a wide-scale. According to Dr. Shaheed’s report, 78% of witness interviewed
by him reported having been tortured. In one stark example, confirmed by
Iranian authorities, Sattar Beheshti, a dissident blogger was detained,
tortured, and murdered under torture within four days of his detention in
October 2012. No one has been held accountable or charged for his torture
leading to his death.
Furthermore,
Iran has been implementing an increased number of limb amputations, many in
public spaces, which constitute acts of torture and are considered cruel and
inhumane punishment under international law. With great disbelief and regret,
we note the amputation of fingers of an alleged convict in city of Shiraz on 24
January 2013 in public which the Iranian state media widely distributed graphic
pictures of it.
We are also deeply concerned
that dozens of human rights defenders remain jailed as a means to prevent
their human rights activities, including Mr. Abdolfattah Soltani, Ms. Nasrin
Soutoudeh, Mr. Mohammad Seifzadeh and Mr. Mohammad Ali Dadkha.
Mr.
President,
We
call on the members of the Council to strongly support Dr. Shaheed’s mandate
and to use all available means to hold the Iranian government accountable for
its gross violations of international law, particularly with regards to
executions, torture, and limb imputations.
Thank
you. 