Israel:  Palestine Occupied Territories: abduction of a 21-year old Palestinian and the injuring of five other persons by Israeli under-cover agents at a bakery
January 25, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2002 / JanuaryIsrael: Palestine Occupied Territories: abduction of a 21-year old Palestinian and the injuring of five other persons by Israeli under-cover agents at a bakeryCase ISR 250102 Abduction/Aggression and other attacks  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the Palestine Occupied Territories.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Palestinian Society for the Protection of Human Rights and the Environment (Law), a member of the OMCT network, of the abduction of 21-year old Hazim al-Kawasmi and the injuring of five other Palestinians by Israeli under-cover agents at a bakery in Hebron.  According to the information received, on January 24th, 2002, eight Israeli under cover agents, who were disguised as Arabs, raided a downtown Hebron bakery, with the help of Israel’s occupation forces, and shot indiscriminately at the bakery’s staff, injuring Mr. Al-Kawasmi in the legs, before taking him hostage.  The Israeli agents also reportedly physically assaulted other members of the bakery’s staff, and then proceeded to drag Mr. Kawasmi and Mr. Aziz al-Shweiki (52), who also sustained bodily injuries, outside. Also present in the bakery during the time of the raid were Mr. Rami al-Keimari (20), who was injured in the arm, and Messrs. Tarek al-Kawasmi (14), Rabah al-Shweiki (33) and Anas al-Shweiki (16), all of whom sustained bruises during the attack.    According to the report given by Mr. Shweiki, who is currently hospitalised, the Israeli under-cover agents dragged him towards a military ambulance where he was severely beaten. Both men were then taken to an Israeli army post, and although Mr. Shweiki was later released, Mr. Kawasmi remains a hostage.  According to reports, Mr. Shweiki received medical treatment at the Israeli military post before being released 40 minutes after his arrival. Mr. Shweiki also added that he had seen Mr. Kawasmi who was injured and bleeding.   According to the information received, Israeli radio claimed that Mr. Kawasmi is receiving medical treatment at Hadasa hospital, and that he is a member of the Tanzim, a young street fighters’ movement for which he is allegedly wanted by Israel authorities. Mr. Shwiki asserted that Mr. Kawasmi had never been wanted by the Israeli authorities and that he was not politically affiliated with any group.    The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Hazim al-Kawasmi since his abduction by Israeli secret forces, given that he is reportedly injured and in need of urgent medical attention, and may be subjected to further attacks or ill-treatment by the Israeli forces while he being is held captive.  OMCT is also gravely concerned about Israel’s use of hostage-taking, which is prohibited under any interpretation of international humanitarian law, and like the prohibition against torture, is never subject to derogation. Hostage-taking is prohibited under Article 34 of the Fourth Geneva Convention. Furthermore, OMCT condemns the use of excessive force by Israeli authorities against innocent bystanders.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Israel urging them to:  ·	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Hazim al-Kawasmi; ·	intervene with the appropriate authorities in order to secure that he is provided with the adequate medical assistance as a matter of urgency; ·	order his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times; ·	guarantee adequate reparation to Messrs. Hazim al-Kawasmi, Aziz al-Shweiki, Rami al-Keimari, Tarek al-Kawasmi, Rabah al-Shweiki and Anas al-Shweiki; ·	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events  in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; ·	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	Ariel Sharon, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, 3 Kaplan Street, Jerusalem 91007, Israel. Fax:(+ 972 2)566 48 38 / 691 79 15 E-mail: pm@pmo.gov.il or feedback@pmo.gov.il or rohm@pmo.gov.il ·	Meir Shitrit, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, 29 Salah al-Din Street, Jerusalem 91029, State of Israel. Fax:(+ 972 2) 62 8 54 38 or Fax: ++ 972 2 628 8618 Email: sar@justice.gov.il ·	Eli Yishai, Minister of the Interior, Ministry of the Interior, Fax: 00972 2 670 1411 Email: sar@moin.gov.il ·	Shimon Peres, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Fax:(+ 972 2) 530 3704, E-mail: sar@mofa.gov.il ·	The Supreme Court of Justice, Kiryat Ben Gurion, Jerusalem, Israel. Fax: (+ 972 2) 652 71 18 ·	Chief Military Attorney, Brigadier Menahem Finkelstein, Lishkat HaPatzar, HaKirya, Tel Aviv, Fax : (+972 3) 569 20 94  Please also write to the embassies of Israel in your respective country.  Geneva, January 25th, 2002.  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 