Rwanda:  Rwanda: disappearance of Mr. Sugira
April  9, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Rwanda / 2002 / AprilRwanda: Rwanda: disappearance of Mr. SugiraCase Rwanda 090402 					    Disappearance   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Rwanda.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat was informed by Agir Ensemble pour les droits de l’homme, a member of the OMCT network, of the following facts. Last 12 March, Mr. Samson SUGIRA, born in 1971 in Kibuye, participated in Kigali, neighborhood of Gatengo, in a funeral ceremony of a recently assassinated man. While he was in the courtyard in the house of the deceased, a man approached him and asked him for help. Mr. Sugira obliged, thinking that this concerned a parent of the deceased, and the two men left in the car of the visitor. Since this incident, no one has seen Mr. Samson Sugira again.  According to his sister and uncle, who have undertaken research, M. Sugira had been located in the Gikongo prison, but prison authorities have denied this charge.  OMCT expresses its grave concern as to the fate of Mr. Samson SUGIRA. Not having had news concerning him for nearly a month, it fears for his physical and psychological integrity.  Actions requested.  We request you kindly to write to the authorities in Rwanda, urging them to:  i.	Immediately identify the whereabouts of Mr. Samson Sugira ;  ii.	Take all necessary measures in order to guarantee respect for his physical and psychological integrity; iii.	Guarantee his access to family visits; iv.	Order his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times.  Adresses.  §	Major General Paul Kagame, President of the Republic, Presidency of the Republic, BP 15, Kigali, Rwanda, Fax : 250 84 769, 250 84 390  §	Colonel Emmanuel Habyarimana, Minister of Defence, Ministry of Defence, BP 23 Kigali, Rwanda, Fax : 250 72 431, 250 76 969  §	M. Jean de Dieu Mucyo, Minister of Justice and of Institutional Relations, Ministry of Justice, BP 160 Kigali, Rwanda, Fax : 250 86 509   Please also write to the diplomatic representatives of Rwanda in your country.  Geneva, 9 April 2002 