Mauritania:  Mauritania: intimidation of workers on strike
November  6, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Urgent Interventions / Mauritania / 2002 / NovemberMauritania: Mauritania: intimidation of workers on strikeECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS CONCERN Case MRT 061102 ESCRC  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Mauritania.   Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by SOS-Esclaves Mauritanie, a member of the OMCT network, that the Mauritanian authorities used intimidation against striking workers in order to break their strike action started on October 19 2002 in Nouakchott.  According to the information received, the warehousemen dockers of Nouakchott have been on strike since October 19 2002 and were joined in their action on October 29 by the dockers of the Port authority, who engaged in an unlimited and unitary strike, regardless of their trade union’s membership, in order to obtain a rise in the rates of remuneration of the metric ton.  It is reported that although this peaceful strike was engaged in conformity with the legislation governing the right to strike, the Mauritanian authorities intervened in order to break the action of the workers, by inciting employers to refuse to engage into negotiations, on the one hand, and by intimidating workers, on the other hand.   In this respect, the National Gendarmerie allegedly took unemployed workers staying in the suburbs of the city and brought them with their vehicles of service to the dockers’ workplace  in a view of making them replace the workers on strike. This was allegedly organised to put pressure on the workers on strike and on the trade unions’ leaders.   Action requested   Please write to the Mauritanian authorities urging them to:  i.	put an end to any attempts to intimidate the workers on strike;  ii.	encourage both parties to engage in negotiations in order to find an acceptable solution to the conflict;  iii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these events, identify those responsible, bring them before a competent and impartial civil tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law;  iv.	guarantee the respect for economic, social and cultural rights of the workers, including the right to work, the right to fair wages guaranteeing a decent living for the workers and their families, the right to form and join trade unions and the right to strike in accordance with international law.   Addresses    ·	Son Excellence Monsieur le Président Maaouiya Ould Sid `Ahmed Taya, Président de la République, La Présidence, BP 184 Nouakchott, Mauritanie Fax: + 222 2 52636   ·	Monsieur Dah Ould Abdel Jelil, Ministre de l'Intérieur, des Postes et des Télécommunications, Ministère de l'Intérieur, des Postes et des Télécommunications, BP 195 Nouakchott , Mauritanie Fax: + 222 2 53661  ·	Monsieur Lemrabott Sidi Mahmoud Ould Cheikh Ahmed , Ministre de la Justice, Ministère de la Justice, BP 350 Nouakchott , Mauritanie Fax: + 222 2 57002 or + 222 2 549 95  Please also write to the embassies of Mauritania in your respective country.  Geneva, November 6th 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply 