Philippines:  Alleged extrajudicial killing of Mr. Rudy Dejos and his son, Mr. Rudyric Dejos
March 10, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2011 / MarchPhilippines: Alleged extrajudicial killing of Mr. Rudy Dejos and his son, Mr. Rudyric DejosCase PHL 100311
Alleged extrajudicial killings/ Alleged acts of
torture and ill-treatment/ Risk of impunity
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in
the following situation in the Philippines.
Brief description of
the situation
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been
informed by the Alliance for the
Advancement of People’s Rights (KARAPATAN), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture
Network, about the alleged extrajudicial killing and torture of Mr. Rudy
Dejos, a 50-years old farmer and Chieftain of B’laan tribe, and his son,
Mr. Rudyric Dejos, 26-years old and also farmer, in Barangay Zone 1,
Municipality of Sta. Cruz, in the province of Davao del Sur. Both were members
of the Zone-1 Farmers Associations (ZOFA)[1],
an organisation of farmers of the Zone-1 founded on 19 January 2011, and affiliate to the Kilusang Magbubukid
Pilipinas (KMP)[2].
According to the information received, on 27 February
2011, at around 4:00 p.m. Ms. Mercy Dejos, Mr. Rudy Dejos’ wife, returned home
after having visited a relative the day before, when she found the dead bodies
of her husband and her son, Mr. Rudyric Dejos, lying on their kitchen floor.
The two bodies reportedly bore gunshot and stab wounds. The bodies were also
covered with bruises and the hands and nails of the two victims were smashed,
signs of possible acts of torture. Mr. Rudy Dejos, and his son, Mr. Rudyric
Dejos were reportedly working on their farmland on the morning of 27
February 2011. Ms.
Mercy Dejos believes that they were killed around noon as the meal Mr. Rudy Dejos prepared was
left untouched. 
According to the same information, they are believed
to have been killed by members of the 39th Infantry Battalion of the
Armed Forces of Philippines (AFP). Mr. Rudy Dejos, and his son, Mr. Rudyric
Dejos, had been reportedly threatened in the past by alleged members of the
AFP. In June 2010, some members of the 39th Battalion of the AFP
installed a camp in the Barangay Hall at the center of the Zone-1, Municipality of Sta. Cruz, where they conducted village meetings,
also called pulong-pulong, aiming to offer the population of the region the
opportunity to “clear” themselves of accusations of insurgency.[3]
Mr. Rudy Dejos’ tribe, the B’laan, have been accused by the AFP of being part
of the New People’s Army (NPA), and he was to “clear” himself of these
accusations. Mr. Rudy Dejos reportedly decided not to go to the meeting, as he
thought the military would not believe his point of view. 
Furthermore, on 6 June 2010, a man called Boyong, and allegedly a
known member of the 39th Battalion of the AFP, reportedly interrogated
Mr. Rudyric Dejos about his brother-in-law, suspected of being an NPA member,
and took a picture of him without his consent. In December 2010, a man by the
name of Arman, allegedly a leader of the Barangay Defense System[4]
of the village and a known military intelligence agent, threatened the victim
over the imminent founding of the ZOFA.
The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely
concerned about the circumstances surrounding the killings of Mr. Rudy Dejos,
and his son, Mr. Rudyric Dejos, which seem to suggest that they may have been
victim of an extrajudicial killing. OMCT recalls that the authorities have to
fulfil their obligations under international human rights law to protect the
right to life and the right not to be subjected to torture or other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and to bringing to justice those
responsible for violating these rights. OMCT is indeed deeply preoccupied about
repeated reports of extrajudicial killings and torture in the course of
counter-insurgency operations in the country (see OMCT previous urgent
appeals).
Accordingly, OMCT
urges the competent authorities to carry out a prompt, effective,
thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the
circumstances surrounding the killing of Mr.
Rudy Dejos and Mr. Rudyric Dejos, and into the allegations of torture,
in accordance with international human rights standards, such as the UN
Principle on the Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extra-legal,
Arbitrary and Summary Executions, and the UN Convention Against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the result of which
must be made public, in order to bring those responsible before a competent,
independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative
sanctions as provided by law. 
OMCT is
also gravely concerned about the safety of Mr. Rudy Dejos’ and Mr. Rudyric Dejos’ family
members, and calls on the competent authorities to guarantee, in all
circumstances, their physical and psychological integrity.
Actions Requested
Please write to the
authorities in the Philippines urging them to:
i.                    
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Rudy
Dejos’ and Mr. Rudyric Dejos’ family; 
ii.                  
Carry out a
prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the circumstances of the killing and the
allegations of acts of torture of Mr. Rudy Dejos and Mr. Rudyric Dejos, in
accordance with international human rights standards, inter alia, with the UN
Principle on the Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extra-legal,
Arbitrary and Summary Executions, and the UN Convention Against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the result of which must
be made public, in orderto bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial
tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by
law;
iii.                 
Ensure that adequate, effective and prompt
reparation, including adequate compensation, is granted to the victims’
families;
iv.                
Guarantee
the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country
in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
Ø      H.E. Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Republic of the Philippines,
Malacaang Palace, JP Laurel St., San Miguel, Manila, Philippines, Fax: (+632) 742-1641 / 929-3968, E-mail: corres@op.gov.ph / opnet@ops.gov.ph
Ø      Sec. Teresita Quintos-Deles, Presidential Adviser on
the Peace Process, Office of the Presidential
Adviser on the Peace Process (OPAPP), 7th
Floor Agustin Building I, Emerald Avenue,
Pasig City 1605, Fax:+63 (2) 638 2216, E-Mail Address: osec@opapp.gov.ph
Ø      Ret. Lt. Gen. Voltaire T. Gazmin, Secretary,
Department of National Defense, Room 301 DND
Building, Camp Emilio Aguinaldo, E. de los
Santos Avenue, Quezon City, Fax:+63(2) 911 6213, Email:
osnd@philonline.com
Ø      Atty. Leila M. De Lima, Secretary, Department of
Justice, Padre Faura St., Manila, Direct Line 521-8344; 5213721, Trunkline 523-84-81 loc.214, Fax: (+632) 521-1614, Email: doj.delima@gmail.com
Ø      Hon. Loretta Ann P. Rosales, Chairperson, Commission on Human Rights, SAAC
Bldg., UP Complex, Commonwealth Avenue, Diliman,
Quezon City, Philippines, Fax: (+632) 929 0102, Email:
chair.rosales.chr@gmail.com 
Ø      Permanent Mission
of the Philippines to the United Nations in Geneva, 47 Avenue Blanc, 1202
Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 716 19
32, Email: mission.philippines@ties.itu.int
Please also write to the embassies of the Philippines in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 10 March 2011
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.



[1] The ZOFA was
established after the Patulangon Farmers Association (PATUFA) was forced to
dissolve. The 39th Infantry Battalion of the Armed Forces of
Philippines (AFP) accused the PATUFA of being a front organisation for the New
Peoples’s Army (NPA). 


[2] The KMP (Peasant
Movement of the Philippines) is a democratic
and militant movement of landless peasants, land workers and smallholders.


[3] The military
presence in the region is high as consequence of counter-insurgency operations,
especially since the new counter-insurgency program Oplan Bayanihan has been
installed in January 2011. As one of the main focus, the program intends to
recruit civilians, allegedly also under coercion, for the counter-insurgency
activities. Progressive organisations and party lists are often reportedly
labelled by the AFP as “supporters” of the NPA. 


[4] Barangay Defense System (BDS) is a group of civilians formed by the AFP
after a massive military counter-insurgency operation. Some of the members of
the BDS are reportedly forced or coerced to join, and some are given firearms
by the AFP. 