Bahrain:  ‘Call for Nabeel Rajab’s release’, rights groups urge 50 governments
September 15, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2016 / SeptemberBahrain: ‘Call for Nabeel Rajab’s release’, rights groups urge 50 governments

15 September 2016 – Rights groups yesterday wrote to the governments of 50
states urging them to publicly call for the release of Bahraini human rights
defender Nabeel Rajab, who faces up to 15 years’ imprisonment for comments he
made on Twitter. Last week, Bahrain brought the new charge of “defaming the
state” against him, after an op-ed was published under his name in The New York
Times.
 
The letter
from 22 NGOs, including Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International, urges the
50 governments to "speak out on Bahrain’s continued misuse of the judicial
system to harass and silence human rights defenders, through charges that
violate freedom of expression."
Among those addressed are the governments of France, Switzerland, the
United Kingdom and the United States. While the US State Department called for Nabeel Rajab’s release on 6 September, other governments have not
done so. The 50 states addressed in the letter are all previous signatories of
statements at the United Nations criticizing Bahrain's ongoing human rights
violations and calling for progress.
 
The UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Prince Zeid bin Ra’ad
Al-Hussein, used his opening statement at the 33rd Human
Rights Council this week to raise concern over Bahrain's harassing and
arresting human rights defenders. He cautioned Bahrain: "The past
decade has demonstrated repeatedly and with punishing clarity exactly how
disastrous the outcomes can be when a Government attempts to smash the voices
of its people, instead of serving them."
 
Nabeel Rajab, the President of the Bahrain Center for Human Rights, has
been held in pre-trial detention since 13 June. During this time he has
been held largely in solitary confinement, and his health has deteriorated as a
result. Since 2011, Nabeel Rajab has faced multiple prosecutions and
prison sentences for his vocal activism. He was subjected to a travel ban in
2014 and has been unable to leave the country. 
 
In his current trial, Nabeel Rajab faces charges including “insulting a
statutory body”, “insulting a neighbouring country”, and “disseminating false rumours
in time of war”. These are in relation to remarks he tweeted and retweeted on
Twitter in 2015 relating to torture in Bahrain's Jaw prison and the role of the
Saudi Arabian-led coalition in causing a humanitarian crisis in Yemen.
 
Nabeel Rajab’s next court session has been set for 6 October, when he is
expected to be sentenced.
 
Background
NGOs and others have been urging action on Nabeel Rajab’s case since he
was imprisoned in pre-trial detention in June. The Bahrain Institute for
Rights and Democracy wrote to British Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson on 7 September
urging public action on Nabeel Rajab. On 2 September, 34 NGOs wrote
a letter to the King of Bahrain calling
for Nabeel Rajab's release.


In August, as part of an initiative organised by Index on Censorship, leading
writers wrote a letter to British Prime Minister
Theresa May asking the UK government to call on Bahrain, their ally, to release
Nabeel Rajab. They included playwright David Hare, author Monica Ali,
comedian Shazia Mirza, MP Keir Starmer and Nobel laureate Wole Soyinka. 