Nepal:  Arbitrary arrest of twelve human rights defenders and victims as they were peacefully demonstrating
March  4, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2016 / MarchNepal: Arbitrary arrest of twelve human rights defenders and victims as they were peacefully demonstrating 

NPL 001 / 0316 / OBS 022
Arbitrary arrests / Release /
Obstacles to freedom of assembly
Nepal
March 4, 2016
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human
Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Nepal.
 
Brief description of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by Advocacy Forum - Nepal of the arbitrary arrest by the police of a
group of twelve human rights defenders and victims of human rights violations
as they were peacefully demonstrating to demand justice for the victims of
Nepal’s armed conflict. 
According to
the information received, on February 19, 2016, at around 8:40 am, Messrs. Janak Bahadur Raut, Chairperson
of the Conflict Victims Society for
Justice, Ram Bhandari, Secretary General of the Conflict Victims Common Platform, Bikash Basnet, Program Coordinator at Advocacy Forum-Nepal, Surya Bahadur Adhikari, Chairperson
of Amnesty International Nepal,
Ashok Shrestha Joshi and Bikram Dhukuchu, two
members of Amnesty International Nepal,
Charan Prasai, a human rights activist, Rasna Dhakal and Kanak Mani Dixit, two journalists and human rights activists, and Mahamuni Ishwor Acharya, Bikram Chaudhary and Ms. Sabitri Shrestha, victims
of Nepal’s armed conflict, were all arrested by the police in Tundikhel,
Ratna Park, Kathmandu, where several Government representatives (including
Prime Minister Khadga Prasad Sharma Oli and President Bidhya Devi Bhandari),
were expected to observe Democracy Day. At the time of their arrest, the demonstrators
were peacefully sitting on the roadside with a banner which read “Give Justice
to Ganga Maya[1], Implement Supreme Court's
Order, Give Justice to Conflict Victims”. 
 
The
group was then taken to the Metropolitan Police Circle (MPC) in Anamagar,
Singhadurbar, where the police documented the personal details of the demonstrators.
The demonstrators were never provided a reason for their arrest, and they were
released without charges after four hours in detention.
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the
arbitrary arrest of the twelve above-mentioned demonstrators, which appears aimed
at sanctioning them for exercising their right to freedom of expression and
freedom of assembly. 
 
Actions requested: 

The Observatory urges the authorities of Nepal to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of all human rights
defenders in Nepal;
 
ii. Put an end to all acts harassment, including at the
judicial level, against all human rights defenders in Nepal;
 
iii. Conform in any circumstances with the provisions of the UN
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the
United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially:
- Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and
in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”;
- Article 5, which underscores the right of every individual to form,
join, and participate in non-governmental organizations; and
- Article 12.2, which provides that the State shall “take all necessary
measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone,
individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats,
retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of his or her
rights”;
 
iv. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards
and international instruments ratified by Nepal.
 
Addresses: 
 
·      
Mr. Khadga Prasad Sharma Oli, Prime
Minister, Office of the Prime Minister and Council of Ministers of Nepal, Singh
Durbar, Kathmandu, P.O. Box: 23312, Nepal. Fax: +977 1 4211086, Email: info@opmcm.gov.np
·      
Mr. Shakti Bahadur Basnet, Home
Minister of Nepal, Ministry of Home Affairs, Singh Durbar,
Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: +977 1 421-1257, 421-1286, Email: gunaso@moha.gov.np
·      
Mr. Anupraj Sharma, Chairperson,
National Human Rights Commission Pulchowk, Lalitpur, Nepal, Fax: +977 1 55
47973, E-mail: complaints@nhrcnepal.org;
nhrc@nhrcnepal.org
·      
Mr.
Hari Krishna Karki, Office of Attorney General Ramshah Path, Kathmandu,
Nepal. Fax: +977 1 4262582 / 4218051 Email: info@attorneygeneral.gov.np
·      
Mr. Upendra Kant Aryal, Inspector
General of Police, Police Head Quarters, Naxal, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax:
+977 1 4415593, Email: phqigs@nepalpolice.gov.np
·      
H.E. Mr.
Deepak Dhital, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Nepal to the United
Nations in Geneva, 81 rue de la Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 733 27 22, E-mail: mission.nepal@bluewin.ch
·      
H.E. Mr. Ram Mani Pokharel,
Ambassador of Nepal in Brussels, Avenue Brugmann
210, 1050 Brussels, Tel: +32 2 346 26 58 / 02
346 26 58, Fax: +32 2 344 13 61,
E-mail: embn@skynet.be
 
Please
also write to diplomatic representations of Nepal in your respective countries.



[1] Ms. Ganga Maya Adhikari’s health has been
critical since she started a hunger strike with her late husband, Mr. Nanda
Prasad Adhikari, seeking justice for their son, Krishna Prasad Adhikari, who
was allegedly killed by rebel Maoist cadres in 2004. 