Korea, (South) Republic of:  Court unjustly sentences labour rights leader to five years in prison
July  4, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Korea, (South) Republic of / 2016 / JulyKorea, (South) Republic of: Court unjustly sentences labour rights leader to five years in prison

 

Geneva, Paris, Brussels, July 4, 2016
- The Observatory (a joint OMCT-FIDH
programme), the European Trade Union Confederation (ETUC), the International
Trade Union Confederation (ITUC) and the Trade Union Advisory Committee to the OECD (TUAC) strongly condemn the
sentencing today of KCTU President Mr. Sang-gyun Han to
an unprecedented five years in prison and a 500,000 KRW (about 400 EUR) for
charges related to his legitimate human rights activities.


Judge Dam Shim of the
Seoul Central District Court deemed that as President of KCTU[1]
, Mr. Sang-gyun
Han was ultimately responsible
for the altercations between police and demonstrators during a rally that took
place in November 2015, although Mr. Han had consistently called for calm and
had dissuaded demonstrators from violence[2]. Judge Shim also absolved the police
of responsibility for the altercations, despite the fact that they had pre-emptively fired water
cannons and tear gas directly at peaceful marchers, injuring dozens of
demonstrators. Mr. Han remains in the Seoul Detention Center while his lawyers
file an appeal against his sentence.
 
An
arrest warrant was issued against Mr. Han in June 2015 for his participation in
peaceful demonstrations that took place in April and May 2015 in solidarity
with the victims of the sinking of the Sewol Ferry in 2014. Fearing he would be
subjected to arbitrary detention, Mr. Han went into hiding for almost six
months, briefly going out in public in November 2015 to participate in a rally
to denounce proposed labour reforms. This rally resulted in altercations
between the police and demonstrators, as police had deployed some 20,000 officers
from 248 squadrons, 19 water cannons, 679 buses, and 580 capsicum spray
devices, and took pre-emptive and aggressive action against those who were
peacefully marching. After this rally, Mr. Han went back into hiding, but in
December 2015 turned himself into the police after the latter threatened to
storm the Jogye Buddhist Temple in Seoul where Mr. Han had taken refuge.
 
While
in police detention, Mr. Han has sometimes been denied visitation rights,
including from the General Secretary of the International Trade Union
Confederation for Asia and the Pacific (ITUC-AP) in December
2015, due
to unfounded police concerns “about the possibility of conspiracy and
destruction of evidence”. The judicial harassment of Mr. Han continued, as
prosecutors threatened him with potential sedition charges. Eventually the
prosecution did not file sedition charges for lack of evidence, but did seek an
unjustifiably long prison sentence against Mr. Han.
 
It is
the first time such a harsh sentence is handed down in South Korea in relation
to the participation in an “illegal rally”. This sets a very worrying precedent
for trade unionists and rights activists, who are systematically targeted for
speaking out against government labour policies and workers’ rights violations.

 
In
addition to Mr. Han, 19 other KCTU members and officers were detained and
indicted in relation to the November 2015 rally. As of July 2016, 13 have been
released on bail or suspended sentences, and the remaining six are still in
custody awaiting the outcome of their trials. These include Ms. Tae-sun Bae,
KCTU Director, and Mr. Sung-deok Cho, Vice President of the Korean Public Service and
Transport Workers Union (KPTU), both currently on trial facing possible six-year and five-year
prison sentences respectively.
 
Our
organisations are also concerned for Ms. Young-joo Lee, KCTU Secretary
General, who has taken refuge at the KCTU headquarters in
Seoul since December 2015,in order to avoid being arbitrarily detained by the
police, after the authorities issued a warrant for her arrest for participating
in the demonstrations in 2015. After seven months of being enclosed in KCTU’s
offices, Ms. Lee’s mental and physical health are of concern, but given the
severe judicial harassment of Mr. Han, there is good reason for concern that
Ms. Lee will face similar arbitrary detention and harsh sentencing if she were
to leave the KCTU offices. 
 
Our organisations condemn the ongoing repression,
intimidation, and judicial harassment of labour leaders in South Korea, and in particular the unwarranted sentence
against and arbitrary detention of Mr. Han and the pending arrest of Ms. Lee.
We call on the South Korean authorities to overturn Mr. Han’s sentencing and
put an end to the judicial harassment he is subjected to along with other
labour activists, which aims at deterring the peaceful human rights activities
of labour unions and workers' rights organisations, and to allow them to
exercise their rights to free association, assembly,
and expression without hindrance or fear of reprisals. 
 
The Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (The Observatory) was created in 1997
by FIDH and OMCT. The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or
remedy to situations of repression against human rights defenders.
 
The European Trade
Union Confederation (ETUC) speaks with one voice in the name of the workers at
the European level. It represents 82 National Trade Union Confederations from
36 European countries, as well as 12 European industry federations.
 
The International Trade Union
Confederation (ITUC) unites autonomous and democratic trade unions. It
represents 180 million workers in 162 countries and territories and has 333
national affiliates.The Trade Union Advisory Committee to the OECD (TUAC) is an interface 
for labour unions with the OECD. TUAC’s affiliates consist of over 58 
national trade union centres in the 30 OECD industrialised countries 
which together represent some 66 million workers.



[1] The Korean Confederation of Trade Unions (KCTU) is an organisation representing Korean
workers and the trade union movement, committed to advancing workers’
empowerment through economic, social, and political reform, and the overall democratisation
of the country.


[2] The charges filed against Mr. Han are “special obstruction of public
duty”, “special obstruction of public duty to injure public officials”,
“special destruction of public goods”, “general obstruction of traffic”,
“violation of article 16 of Act on Assembly and Demonstration”, “failure of
dispersion order”, “hosting an assembly at banned place”, “incitement of
violence” and “violation of article 11 of the Act on Assembly and
Demonstration”. 