Egypt:  Harassment and restrictions to freedom of movement against Mr. Mohamed Lotfy
June  4, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2015 / JuneEgypt: Harassment and restrictions to freedom of movement against Mr. Mohamed LotfyEGY 002 / 0615 / OBS 
047
Harassment 
/
Restriction of 
freedom of movement 
Egypt
June 4, 
2015
 
 
The Observatory 
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of 
theInternational Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation 
Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following 
situation in Egypt .
 
Description of the 
situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable 
sources about the harassment and restrictions to freedom of movement against Mr. 
Mohamed Lotfy, Director of the Egyptian Commission for Rights 
and Freedoms (ECRF). 
 
According to information received, on June 
2,2015, Mr. Mohamed Lotfy was held at Cairo airport by the police for a duration 
of three hours. He was travelling to Germany to carry out human rights advocacy 
activities and to speak before the German Parliament about the human rights 
situation in Egypt, in light of the forthcoming Egyptian President’s Abdelfattah 
Al-Sisi’s visit to Germany.
 
He was brought by an airport police officer to 
another officer who was in plain clothes and did not disclose his security 
agency of affiliation. This latter informed him that he was not allowed to fly 
to Germany for security reasons. When Mr. Mohamed Lotfy asked whether he had a 
travel ban, the police officer did not give him a definite answer and informed 
him that a security agency would contact him the following day in order to 
explain the reasons behind the prevention of travel and in order to return his 
passport.
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the 
harassment and restrictions to freedom of movement of Mr. Mohamed Lotfy and 
fears that he may be targeted because of his legitimate human rights 
activities.
 
The Observatory urges the Egyptian authorities 
to immediately return Mr. Mohamed Lofty's passport and to put an end to all acts 
of harassment against him and all other human rights defenders in Egypt.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Egypt asking 
them to:
 
i.              Put an end to all forms of 
harassment, including restrictions of freedom of movement, against Mr. Mohamed 
Lotfy and all human rights defenders in Egypt;
 
ii.              Comply with all the provisions 
of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular 
with:
    
-       its Article 1, which 
provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with 
others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human 
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-       its Article 5(a): 
“For the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental 
freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, 
at the national and international levels (a) To meet or assemble 
peacefully”
-       its Article 6(a), 
which foresees that “everyone has the right, individually and in association 
with others, to participate in peaceful activities against violations of human 
rights and fundamental freedoms”;
-       its Article 12.2, 
which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the 
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in 
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de 
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other 
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the 
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 
iv.           Ensure in all circumstances 
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with 
international human rights standards and international instruments ratified by 
Egypt.
 
Addresses
 
·         President of the 
Arab Republic of Egypt, H.E. Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, 
Fax: +202 23901998
·         Prime Minister, 
Mr. Ibrahim Mehleb, Magles El Shaab Street, Kasr El Aini Street, Cairo, Egypt. 
Fax: + 202 2735 6449 / 27958016. Email: primemin@idsc.gov.eg
·         Minister of the 
Interior, General Mohamed Ibrahim Moustafa, Ministry of the Interior, El-Sheikh 
Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: moi1@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2579 2031 / 2794 5529
·         Minister of 
Justice, Mr. Ahmed Al-Zanad, Ministry of Justice, Magles El Saeb Street, Wezaret 
Al Adl, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2795 8103
·         Public Prosecutor, 
Counsellor Hisham Barakat Dar al-Qadha al-Ali, Ramses Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: 
+202 2577 4716
·         Mr. Mohamed Fayeq, 
President of the National Council For Human Rights, Fax: + 202 25747497 / 
25747670. Email: nchr@nchr.org.eg
·         H.E. Ms. Wafaa 
Bassim, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations in Geneva, 
49 avenue Blanc, 1202 Genève, Switzerland, Email: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41 22 738 44 15
·         Embassy of Egypt 
in Brussels, 19 avenue de l’Uruguay, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 
675.58.88; Email: embassy.egypt@skynet.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or 
embassies of Egypt in your respective country. 