Bahrain:  Ongoing judicial harassment against Ms. Zainab Al-Khawaja
October 13, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2015 / OctoberBahrain: Ongoing judicial harassment against Ms. Zainab Al-KhawajaNew informationBHR 002 / 0914 / OBS 075.3Ongoing judicial 
harassmentBahrainOctober 13, 2015 The Observatory for the 
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International 
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture 
(OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent intervention in 
the following situation in Bahrain. New 
information: The Observatory has been informed by reliable 
sources about the ongoing judicial harassment against Ms. Zainab 
Al-Khawaja, human rights defender and blogger known for her participation in 
peaceful gatherings calling for reforms and the respect of human rights in 
Bahrain.According to the information received, on October 21, 2015, Ms. 
Zainab Al-Khawaja will appear before the Bahraini Court of Appeals for four 
cases: “ripping the picture of the king” in which she was sentenced to two 
months, “insulting a public officer” sentenced to 1 year; another case of 
“insulting the king” sentenced three years’ imprisonment and “entering into a 
restricted area” sentenced to nine months’ imprisonment (see background 
information).The Observatory is greatly concerned about the 
ongoing judicial harassment against Ms. Al-Khawaja, which merely aims at 
sanctioning and hindering her human rights activities. The Observatory calls on 
the Bahraini authorities to drop all charges against Ms. Al-Khawaja, and to put 
an end to any kind of harassment against the latter and her 
relatives.The Observatory more generally reiterates its call on the 
Bahraini authorities to put an end to all acts of harassment – including at the 
judicial level – against all human rights defenders in Bahrain, and to comply 
with all international human rights standards and international instruments 
ratified by Bahrain, in particular the United Nations (UN) Declaration on Human 
Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 
1998.Background information:Ms. Zainab Al-Khawaja is the 
daughter of Mr. Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja, who was sentenced on June 
22, 2011 by the National Safety Court – a military court – to life imprisonment 
for his peaceful human rights activities. On January 7, 2013 Bahrain’s highest 
court upheld the convictions against 13 leading activists for their role in 
anti-government demonstrations in 2011, including Mr. Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja. The 
Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights expressed concerns about the 
lack of fairness and due process afforded to these activists. The court ruling 
came more than a year after the government’s pledge to implement the 
recommendations of the Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry (BICI), which 
called on authorities to “commute the sentences of all persons charged with 
offences involving political expression not consisting of advocacy of violence” 
and to overturn convictions imposed after grossly unfair 
trials.Mr. Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja was subjected to a severe level of 
torture starting from the time of his arrest on April 9, 2011. He is currently 
being held in Jaw prison. He has repeatedly gone on hunger strikes to protest 
his imprisonment and conditions of detention.On December 16, 2011, Ms. 
Zainab Al-Khawaja staged a sit-in to call for reforms and more rights at Abu 
Saiba roundabout and was joined by several women. The riot police fired tear gas 
canisters to disperse them. Ms. Al-Khawaja continued her sit-in peacefully and 
refused to move until she was shot at directly with a tear gas canister. She was 
then handcuffed, dragged across the pavement by her handcuffs, had her hijab 
removed and was slapped by a female police officer. She was further cursed and 
beaten in the police station. She was then released pending 
investigation.On February 27, 2013, she was again arrested during a 
peaceful sit-in to protest authorities’ refusal to hand over the body of a man 
who was killed during a demonstration on February 14, 2013. She was taken to Al 
Hoora police station, where she was charged with “obstructing traffic”, 
“damaging public property”, “prejudice to authority” and “inciting hatred of the 
regime”.On February 27, 2013, the Third High Criminal Court upheld a one 
month imprisonment sentence against her on charges of “participating in an 
illegal gathering” and “entering a restricted zone”, i.e. the Pearl Roundabout, 
in relation to a February-2012 protest. The same court also upheld 
another two-month imprisonment sentence previously rendered by the Lower 
Criminal Court on charge of “damaging Ministry of Interior property”, after Ms. 
Al-Khawaja had torn a photograph of the King of Bahrain, although she had 
already served that sentence after a previous arrest. As a result, the Public 
Prosecution announced in a statement that Ms. Al-Khawaja was to start serving 
her sentence on February 28, 2013, for a total of three months and 20 days. In 
addition, on the same day, the Court of Appeal overturned the acquittal ruled by 
the Court of First Instance on May 2, 2012 in another case related to charges 
of “insulting a police officer” in a military hospital, and sentenced Ms. 
Al-Khawaja to three months imprisonment. Ms. Al-Khawaja was protesting inside 
the Bahrain Defence Forces hospital when her father, Mr. Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja, 
was on hunger strike in that hospital.On May 22, 2013, Ms. Al-Khawaja 
was again sentenced to three months in jail on charges of “taking part in an 
illegal gathering” and “insulting a police officer” in reference to the December 
2011 protest. At the time, she had been serving the two above-mentioned 
sentences and was due to be released at the end of May 2013.On January 
27, 2014, the Criminal Court issued a new sentence in absentia against Ms. 
Zainab Al-Khawaja, where she was sentenced to four extra months of imprisonment 
in two new cases in which she was accused of destroying property of the Ministry 
of Interior during her detention at Isa Town police station in May 2013, after 
she ripped up a picture of the King of Bahrain.On February 16, 2014, Ms. 
Zainab Al-Khawaja was released from prison. At the end of August 2014, she was 
briefly detained when she went to the hospital to visit her father after he was 
transferred there from the prison.On December 4, 2014, Ms. Zainab 
Al-Khawaja was sentenced to a three-year prison term for “insulting the King”, 
as well as being subject to a fine of 3,000 BHD (approx. 7,285 Euros) for 
tearing up a photo of the King of Bahrain before the Court in October 2014. The 
court set bail for 100 BHD (approx. 240 Euros) and she was released pending the 
outcome of the appeal.On December 9, 2014, the Court of Appeals 
sentenced her to 16 months in prison on charges of “destroying government 
property” and “insulting a police officer” whilst in detention in 2012. Although 
Ms. Zainab Al-Khawaja is not currently detained, the sentence may be executed at 
any time.On June 2, 2015, Ms. Zainab Al-Khawaja was sentenced in first 
instance to nine months’ imprisonment on charges of “entering a restricted area” 
and “insulting a public servant”. A bail of 300 BHD (approx. 707 EUR) was paid 
to suspend the implementation.Actions requested:The 
Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to: i. Guarantee in 
all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Abdulhadi 
Al-Khawaja as well as all detained human rights defenders in Bahrain;ii. 
Put an end to any act of harassment, including at the judicial level, against 
Ms. Zainab Al-Khawaja and Mr. Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja, as well as against all human 
rights defenders in Bahrain;iii. Release Mr. Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja 
immediately and unconditionally as his detention is arbitrary since it seems to 
merely sanction his human rights activities;iv. Conform in any 
circumstances with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders, in particular:- its Article 1, which states that “everyone has 
the right, individually or in association with others, to promote the protection 
and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and 
international levels” ;- its Article 6 (c) which states that “everyone has 
the right, individually and in association with others to study, discuss, form 
and hold opinions on the observance, both in law and in practice, of all human 
rights and fundamental freedoms and, through these and other appropriate means, 
to draw public attention to those matters” ;- and its Article 12.2 which 
states that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the 
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in 
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or 
de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a 
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the 
present Declaration”.v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human 
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights 
standards and international instruments ratified by 
Bahrain. Addresses: -        Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL 
KHALIFA, King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 587-        Cheikh Khaled Bin 
Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tel: +973 172 27 555; Fax : +973 
172 12 6032-        Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of 
Justice and Islamic Affairs, Tel: +973 175 31 333; Fax: +973 175 31 284-    
    Lt. Gen. Cheikh Rashed bin Abdulla AL KHALIFA, Minister of Interior, Tel: 
+973 17572222 and +973 17390000. Email: info@interior.gov.bh-        Permanent Mission of Bahrain 
to the United Nations in Geneva, 1 chemin Jacques-Attenville, 1218 
Grand-Saconnex, CP 39, 1292 Chambésy, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50. 
Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch Please also write to diplomatic 
representations of Bahrain in your respective countries. 