Situation of human rights defenders in Africa - Oral intervention at the 54th ordinary session of ACHPR
November  5, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2013 / NovemberSituation of human rights defenders in Africa - Oral intervention at the 54th ordinary session of ACHPRSituation of human rights defenders in Africa - Oral intervention at the 54th ordinary session of ACHPR5 pages / 172 KB

54th ORDINARY SESSION OF THE AFRICAN
COMMISSION ON HUMAN AND PEOPLES' RIGHTS 
Oral Intervention under
agenda item 9: “Situation of human rights defenders”
 
 
Madam
President, 
Madam
the Special Rapporteur for Human Rights Defenders,
Madam
and Sir Commissioners,
Madam
and Sir Delegates,
 
The
OMCT and the FIDH, in the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, reiterate their deep concern about the situation of
human rights defenders in Africa.
 
Since
the last session of the Commission in April 2013, the Observatory has reported,
with great concern, multiple violations of human rights defenders’ rights and
freedoms all across the continent, especially in Angola, Cameroon,
the Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC), Egypt, Mauritania, Rwanda,
Senegal
and Tunisia.

 
Human
rights defenders were attacked, received threats or were slandered in the DRC,
Senegal
and Tunisia.
In some cases they were even killed, as in the DRC and in Cameroon,
in a climate of impunity. Defenders, and in particular defenders of
economic, social and cultural rights, also continued
to be subjected to arbitrary arrests and judicial harassment in Angola,
Cameroon, the
DRC, Egypt, Mauritania and
Tunisia.
Obstacles to freedom of association were also recorded, as for instance in Angola,
Egypt
and Rwanda.
 
The
defenders who saw their rights violated were, among others, members of
non-governmental organisations (NGOs), lawyers, journalists, women's rights
activists, judges and civil society organisations who defend the right to
freedoms of expression, association and peaceful protest, denounce human rights
abuses by State actors or powerful companies and fight for the respect of the
rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) people and
fundamental freedoms in general. 
 
1. Ongoing acts of violence against human rights defenders in the
African continent
 
a) Assassination of human rights defenders in the DRC
and Cameroon
 
All across
the continent, human rights defenders have again been subjected to violent
assaults and in some worse cases to assassination. This most extreme form of
attack to human rights defenders and their work must be condemned in the
strongest terms. The impunity of perpetrators of such awful acts, which too
often remains the rule, is a sign of weakness and failure of States in their
obligations to protect defenders, which may encourage perpetrators to commit
further acts of violence against human rights activists. 
 
Since the
last session of the ACHPR, three cases of killing of human rights defenders
were reported to the Observatory. 
 
In the DRC,
Mr. Rocksy Tshimpaka was killed on
September 19, 2013, for denouncing on a television programme the torture and
consequent killing of a Congolese citizen by the police in 2012. 
 
On August 7,
2013, rebel groups savagely murdered Mr. Godefroid
Mutombo, a member of the NGO Libertas
who had denounced several human rights violations in which the Congolese
militia and military were reportedly involved. 
 
The Observatory
also remains particularly concerned by the ongoing impunity for the
assassination in June 2010 of Messrs. Floribert Chebeya Bazire,
Executive Director of the Voice of the Voiceless (Voix des sans voix -
VSV) and a member of OMCT General Assembly, and Fidèle Bazana, a member
of VSV. While the complaint lodged by the two defenders’ widows has remains
unheard for more than three years now, it is urgent that General John Numbi is
brought before an impartial and independent tribunal, so that he can face his
responsibility for the murder of their husbands. 
 
The
Observatory was also shocked and saddened by the murder of Mr. Eric Ohena Lembembe, Executive Director of the
Cameroonian Foundation for AIDS (CAMFAIDS), who was brutally assaulted and
killed in July 2013 following an upsurge of threats to activists, lawyers and
organisations engaged in the defence of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex (LGBT) rights in Cameroon in the previous months. The
Government of Cameroon did not publicly condemn this killing, and police
investigations have failed to produce results.
 
b) Threats and slandering campaigns against human
rights defenders
 
On several
occasions, human rights defenders were victims of threats or defamation
campaigns as attempts to intimidate and silence them. Such acts were committed
either directly by State agents or by non-State actors with the silent
complicity of the authorities, therefore encouraging acts of violence against
human rights defenders.
 
Such was the
case in the DRC,
where several defenders and lawyers representing the plaintiffs in the case of
the murder of Messrs. Floribert Chebeya and Fidèle
Bazana were subjected to threats and pressures ahead of the appeal trial that
resumed in April before the Supreme Military Court. For instance, on the night of May 29 to 30, 2013, the
cabinet of lawyer Jean-Marie Kabengele Ilunga was vandalised by unknown persons. A bag containing conclusions and notes on the trial
was stolen on this occasion.
 
Still in the DRC,
in June 2013, collaborators of the Governor of the Eastern Province started a
defamation campaign against Mr. Dismas
Kitenge, President of the Lotus
Group and Vice-President of FIDH, accusing him of being a “puppet of the West”,
and announcing that he would be “corrected”. They also incited the population
not to listen to the “message of distraction, division and nostalgia” of human
rights defenders. Subsequently, a group of unidentified individuals threw
stones on Mr. Kitenge’s home, promising to attack anyone who tried to sabotage
the Governor’s development activities. 
 
In May 2013,
the Executive Director of the branch of Amnesty International in Senegal,
Mr. Seydi Gassama, was defamed and
threatened with arrest by senior representatives of the Parliament and the
Government following the presentation of a report that denounced the
persistency in human rights violations in the country, despite the change of
Government in 2012. The Observatory denounces
these public accusations that aimed
to discredit and more
generally to silence human
rights defenders in the country in an attempt to assimilate them to members of the opposition.
 
In Tunisia,
the Observatory was concerned following the death threats that were issued in
May 2013 against Ms. Kalthoum Kennou,
President of the Association of Tunisian Magistrates (Association des magistrats tunisiens - AMT) and Judge at the
Supreme Court, for defending the independence of the judiciary in the country,
as they are indicative of the obstacles posed to the proper functioning of the
judiciary through acts of intimidation against impartial and independent
judges.
 
2.
Judicial harassment of defenders of economic, social and cultural rights in
Africa
 
In many
countries of the continent, the judicial system remains used by the authorities
as a tool of retaliation against human rights defenders activities. Such was
the case in Angola, Cameroon, the DRC, Egypt, Mauritania
and Tunisia, where the Observatory recorded in particular
acts of judicial harassment against defenders of economic, social and cultural
rights.
 
In Angola,
journalist and human rights defender Mr. Rafael
Marques de Morais is currently facing criminal charges of defamation
related to the publication of his investigative book documenting violations of
human rights and corruption issues associated to diamond mining industries in
Lundas region.
 
Arbitrary
arrests and detentions also remained frequent in the continent. 
 
In Tunisia,
the feminist activist Ms. Amina Sboui
was arbitrarily detained from May 19 to August 1, 2013 as a result of her
activities in favour of women’s rights. The criminal proceeding against her was
filled with irregularities and inconsistencies. 
 
In Mauritania,
on October 6, 2013, 25 members of the Initiative for the Resurgence of the
Abolitionist Movement in Mauritania (Initiative pour la résurgence du
mouvement abolitionniste en Mauritanie - IRA), who were peacefully
protesting since September 9 against the inaction of the local authorities in
Boutilimit in relation to a case of alleged slavery, were arbitrarily arrested,
before being released without charge the same day. The sit-in was violently
dispersed by the police. On September 30, 2013, five members of IRA had already
been arrested in this framework and were charged with "unlawful
assembly" and "membership to an unknown organisation" on October
1. Two of them, Messrs. Abdallahi Ould Hemdy and Slama Ould Seyidi,
remain in custody in the prison of Rosso.
 
In Egypt,
Mr. Hassan Mustafa, a human rights
activist working on economic rights and police violence, remains arbitrarily detained since
January 21, 2013 for requesting information on the situation and
whereabouts of demonstrators arrested two days earlier. On
June 15, 2013, he was sentenced in appeal to one year's imprisonment under the
charges of "defamation" of a staff member of the Alexandria
Prosecutor’s Office, which he strongly denied. His arbitrary detention and
sentencing in appeal is another sign of the weaknesses to protect and guarantee
human rights defender’s activities in the country. 
 
In Cameroon, several members
of the Mbororo Social and Cultural Development Association (MBOSCUDA), an
organisation defending the rights of Mbororo pastoralists in North-Western
Cameroon, have been subjected to judicial harassment on the basis of a
complaint lodged by a local influential landowner, in relation to a criminal
case on the assassination attempt of Mr. Jeidoh Duni, MBOSCUDA
Para Legal Officer, on July 1, 2012. Those acts of harassment have increased
after MBOSCUDA and its members submitted a report in early May 2013 in the
framework of the United Nations Human Rights Council Universal Periodic
Review (UPR) of Cameroon in Geneva, outlining the various obstacles
faced by the Mbororo community.
 
Furthermore,
in addition to judicial harassment, denials of justice and unjustifiable delays
in judicial procedures continue to be a frequent way of targeting human rights
defenders. For instance, in the DRC, nine members of the Association for the Advocacy of the Interests of the City of
Bandundu (Association pour la défense des
intérêts de la ville de Bandundu - ADIVB) remain currently detained in
Bandundu prison after being sentenced in April 2013 for "contempt of the
public authority", for calling upon the population to take part in a
peaceful demonstration to protest against the raise of the prices of
electricity and water. On August 26, 2013, the lawyers
of the nine defenders filed a bail request before the Supreme Court in Kinshasa
but, as of today, the decision of the Court has still not been made public, in
contradiction with Congolese law.


3. Obstacles to freedom of association in
African countries
 
Since
the last session of the ACHPR, the Observatory has also continued to record
obstacles to freedom of association, as for instance in Angola, Egypt
and Rwanda. 
 
In Angola, the work of
human rights NGOs is faced with structural impediments. The NGO registration
process remains complex, costly and opaque and the NGO sector is crippled by a
lack of human resources and financial sustainability.
 
The
Observatory is also particularly concerned by alarming restrictions and
criminalisation of civil society work in Egypt. We were particularly dismayed
by the
sentence issued by North Cairo Criminal Court on June 4, 2013, condemning 43
Egyptians and foreign staff members of five foreign civil society organisations
to one to five years in prison for “managing unlicensed branches” of their
organisations, “conducting research, political training, surveys, and workshops
without licenses”, “training political parties and groups” and “illegally
receiving foreign funding”. The court also ordered the confiscation of funds and the
closure of Egypt-based branches of Freedom House, the International Republican
Institute, the National Democratic Institute, the International Centre for
Journalists (ICFJ), and Konrad Adenauer Foundation. The
sentencing came at a time when a draft for a new Law on Associations
was being discussed before the Shura Council, aiming to impose strict control
over NGOs establishment, funding, daily activities, internal decisions and
functioning. 
 
In Rwanda,
the board of the Rwandan League for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights
(Ligue rwandaise pour la promotion
et la défense des droits humains - LIPRODHOR), one of the few
independent human rights organisations in the country, was ousted on July 21,
2013 by a small number of members, and replaced
by people believed to be favorable to the Government. A
few days later, the Rwanda Governance Board (the public body in charge of
the registration of associations) expeditiously recognised the new board. This
takeover of an independent NGO took place following the decision
of LIPRODHOR to withdraw from a Rwandan umbrella body for human rights
organisations. On July 24, bank accounts of LIPRODHOR were frozen and
the police canceled a training workshop organised by LIPRODHOR on how to submit
evidence to the UN UPR. Reportedly, the police would also have threatened
LIPRODHOR staff with imprisonment if they did not cooperate with the new board.
 
Recommendations:

 
In view of
the above-mentioned elements, the Observatory reminds States Parties of their
obligation to comply with all the provisions of the African Charter, in
particular those relating to the protection of human rights defenders.
Therefore, the Observatory calls upon the ACHPR to request all States to:
 
Implement all the provisions of
     the 1998 United Nations (UN) Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
     especially by guarantying in all circumstances their physical and
     psychological integrity and their capacity to operate in an enabling
     environment;
 
Release all defenders who are
     detained for merely exercising their right to fundamental freedoms, in
     particular freedoms of expression, peaceful assembly and association;
 
Put an end to all acts of
     harassment - including at the judicial level - against human rights
     defenders;
 
Order an immediate,
     thorough, transparent investigation into allegations of violations of
     defenders’ rights, in order to identify all those responsible, bring
     them before an independent tribunal, and apply them the sanctions
     provided by the law;
 
Refrain from adopting any
     provisions that do not comply with international and African standards
     with respect to the exercise of the right to freedoms of expression,
     peaceful assembly and association, and abrogate or revise any such
     provisions that may be in force;
 
Send a standing invitation to
     the UN and ACHPR’s Special Rapporteurs on Human Rights Defenders and
     facilitate their visits.
 
The
Observatory also calls upon the ACHPR to:
 
Adopt the Guidelines on the
     rights to freedom of association and peaceful assembly prepared by the
     Study Group on Freedom of Association in Africa;
 
Adopt a resolution on the
     fundamental right to freedom of association, including the right of NGOs
     to access funding.
 
***
Banjul,
October 22 - November 5, 2013 