Bangladesh:  Alleged extrajudicial killing of Mr. Mohammad Fozlul Haque Fozol_No proper investigation
April  1, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2011 / AprilBangladesh: Alleged extrajudicial killing of Mr. Mohammad Fozlul Haque Fozol_No proper investigationCase BGD 010411
Alleged extrajudicial
killing/ No proper investigation/ Risk of impunity 
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Bangladesh.

Brief description of the situation
The
International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by ODHIKAR, a member of
OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the alleged extrajudicial killing of Mr. Mohammad
Fozlul Haque Fozol, a 44-year-old businessman from Lamapara village,
Fotullah, in Narayanganj district.
According
to the information collected by ODHIKAR, on 13 November 2010, at around 9:30
pm, six to seven armed men in plain clothes, who introduced themselves as
members of the Rapid Action Battalion (RAB) 11 Crime Prevention Company (CPC)-1,
arrested Mr. Mohammad Fozlul Haque Fozol without any reason being given, at a
relative’s tea-stall near Bhakesshori bus-stand No. 2, in Shiddhirgonj, where
he was having tea with acquaintances. Mr. Mohammad Fozlul Haque Fozol was handcuffed,
blindfolded, gagged and taken into a pickup. When he tried to flee, two of the
RAB members allegedly twisted his neck and forced him to lie in the pickup. The
members of the RAB 11 CPC-1 also reportedly threatened to open fire on the
people on the street, who had gathered near the pickup, before they left with
Mr. Mohammad Fozlul Haque Fozol to an unknown location. 
According
to the same information received, Mr. Mohammad Fozlul Haque Fozol’s sister, Ms.
Sokhina Begum, started to look for her brother immediately after she was
informed about his arrest by one of the acquaintances. She reportedly contacted
the office of RAB-11, in Shiddhirgonj, and Fotullah Police Station but they
denied having arrested him. The day after, some journalists informed her that Mr.
Mohammad Fozlul Haque Fozol’s body had been found at Khanpur Hospital. There, she saw her brother’s body
which reportedly bore five gunshot wounds. 
According
to a RAB 11 CPC- 1 First Information Report (FIR) filed at Shiddhirgonj Police
Station, Mr. Mohammad Fozlul Haque Fozol was injured in crossfire between RAB
officers and a group of criminals in Abu Mia’s plot, in Ati Housing area, in
Shiddhirgonj, on 14 November 2010, at around 4 am. The RAB stated that Mr. Mohammad Fozlul
Haque Fozol was shot by criminals engaged in arms trade and then taken by the
police to the Khanpur hospital where he died under treatment (however,
according to the attending doctor at the said hospital, Mr. Mohammad Fozlul
Haque Fozol was already dead upon arrival at the hospital). It is further
reported that seven cases, including on charges of kidnapping, murder and
extortion, had been pending against Mr. Mohammad Fozlul Haque. 
The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned
about the circumstances surrouding the arrest and death of Mr. Mohammad Fozlul Haque Fozol, which seem to suggest that he may have been victim
of an extrajudicial killing. The RAB has repeatedly used “crossfire killing” to
cover extradudicial killing. OMCT recalls that the authorities in Bangladesh have to fulfil their obligations
under international human rights law to protect the right to life and to
bringing to justice those responsible for violating this right. OMCT is indeed
concerned that no effective investigation was conducted into the circumstances
of the arrest and killing of Mr. Mohammad Fozlul Haque Fozol.
Accordingly, OMCT calls on the competent authorities to carry out a
prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the
killing of Mr. Mohammad Fozlul Haque
Fozol, in accordance with international
human rights standards, inter alia, with the UN Principle on the
Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and Summary
Executions, the result of which must be made public, in order to bring those
responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply
penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law. 
Action requested
Please
write to the authorities in Bangladesh urging them to:
i.                    
Carry out a prompt, effective, thorough,
independent and impartial investigation into the killing of Mr. Mohammad
Fozlul Haque Fozol, in accordance with
international human rights standards, inter alia, with the UN Principle
on the Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and
Summary Executions, the result of which must be made public, in order to bring
those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and
apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;
ii.                  
Guarantee, in all circumstances,
the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Mohammad Fozlul Haque Fozol family members;
iii.                 
Ensure
that an effective remedy, including the right to full redress with compensation
be granted to the victim’s family concerned; 
iv.                
Guarantee the respect of human
rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with
national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
Ø      Ms. Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister, Office
of the Prime Minister, Gona Bhaban, Old Sangsad Bhaban, Tejgaon, Dhaka,
Bangladesh, Fax: +880 2 811 3243, Email: info@pmo.gov.bd;
pm@pmo.gov.bd
Ø       Ms. Sahara Khatun, Minister for Home
Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat Building 4, Dhaka,
Bangladesh, Fax: +880 2 716 9667 or +880 2 717 1611. E-mail: minister@mha.gov.bd
Barrister Shafique Ahmed, Minister for Law, Justice and
Parliamentary Affairs, Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs,
Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Fax: +880 2 7168557, E-mail: minoflaw@bdonline.com, info@minlaw.gov.bd
Ø     
   Dr. Dipu Moni, Honorable
Minister, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Fax: +880 2 9562188, E-mail: dirfe@mofa.gov.bd
Professor Dr. Mizanur Rahman, Chairman, National Human Rights Commission,
Gulpheshan Plaza (Level-11), 8, Shahid Sangbadik Selina Parvin Sarak, Boro
Magbazar, Dhaka-1217, Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 9137743. E-mail: nhrc.bd@gmail.com
Ø     
Mr. Mahbubey Alam, Attorney General for Bangladesh, Attorney General's
Office, Supreme Court Premises, Dhaka, Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 9561568. E-mail:
adv_mahbubey@yahoo.com
Ø     
Mr. Abdus Sobhan Sikder, Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs. Fax: +880
2 7164788, E-mail : secretary@mha.gov.bd
Ø      Mr. Hasan Mahmud Khandoker, Inspector
General of Police, Police Headquarters, Phoenix Road, Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh,
Fax: +880 2 712 5840. E-mail : ig@police.gov.bd
Ø      Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh to the United Nations in Geneva, 65 rue de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva,
Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 46 16, E-mail: mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.int
Please also
write to the embassies of Bangladesh
in your respective country.
***
Geneva,
1 April
2011
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting
the code of this appeal in your reply 