Kyrgyzstan:  Azimjan Askarov Case: the decision of the Supreme Court is nowhere near the implementation of the UN decision
July 13, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2016 / JulyKyrgyzstan: Azimjan Askarov Case: the decision of the Supreme Court is nowhere near the implementation of the UN decisionParis-Geneva,
July 13, 2016 -
Yesterday, the Supreme Court of Kyrgyzstan ordered a fresh appeal hearing before the Chuy Regional Court in Bishkek
in the case of human rights defender Azimjan Askarov, and left his life
sentence conviction unchanged. Azimjan Askarov remains behind bars in blatant
violation of the Views of the UN Human Rights Committee (CCPR), which concluded on
April 21 that “Kyrgyzstan must take appropriate steps to immediately release
him”. 
 
On July 11 and
12, 2016, the Kyrgyzstan Supreme Court heard the appeal that had been filed by the
lawyers of Mr. Azimjan Askarov under Article 41.2 of the Constitution,
which obliges Kyrgyzstan to restore human rights in the event that
international bodies confirm a violation. Both hearings were attended by lawyer
Kirill Koroteev, from the Human Rights Centre "Memorial" (Russia),
within the framework of a trial observation mandated by the Observatory. 
 
“The purpose of this trial before the Supreme Court was to
reconsider the case of Azimjan Askarov in the light of the CCPR Views, which
requested his release in the first place, and his retrial if necessary”, said Kirill
Koroteev, commenting on the decision.
 
“However, sending the case to a regional court means that
the conviction and life sentence handed down by the Bazar Kurgan District Court
in 2010 remain intact, and that Mr. Askarov remains in detention on the basis
of the district court judgment. This is how the Supreme Court avoided even to
discuss the possibility of his release, which is nowhere near the
implementation of the CCPR Views”, he added,
highlighting that it is likely that the Chuy Regional Court will not even
examine evidence anew.
 
According to
our observer, the trial was also marred by a number of procedural irregularities.
A violation of the principles of equality of arms was notably reported in the
morning of July 12, when a group of ethnic Kyrgyz women and men from southern
Kyrgyzstan - some of whom appeared before the court with the formal “victim”
status of the 2010 crimes imputed to Mr. Askarov - were invited by the Presiding
Judge to present their views, while the attempts of Mr. Askarov's lawyers to
secure his attendance were repeatedly ignored. Besides, the court session had
to be interrupted when the above-mentioned victims aggressively shouted at the
bench and at Mr. Askarov's lawyers, and after some of them even attempted to
physically assault the lawyers.
 
The Observatory deplores the decision of the Supreme Court of
Kyrgyzstan as well as the series of irregularities noted during the trial, and
calls upon the Kyrgyz authorities to immediately release Mr. Azimjan Askarov as
requested by the CCPR, as well as to put an end to any kind of harassment
against the latter and more generally against all human rights defenders in the
country.
 
The Observatory
recalls that Mr. Azimjan Askarov founded the group Vozduh (Air) in 2002 in
Bazar Kurgan, Jalalabad Oblast, in the South of the country to investigate
police brutality and the conditions of Kyrgyz prisons. On several occasions,
Azimjan Askarov was successful in fighting impunity in cases involving the
local police. As a result, several police officials were not appreciative of
his work. During the ethnic clashes of June 2010 in southern Kyrgyzstan, he
documented the violence in Bazar Kurgan. Azimjan Askarov has repeatedly claimed
his innocence, providing proof that he was not even present at the crime
scene. Following a trial denounced by several international human rights groups
for irregularities, including alleged torture and the courtroom intimidation of
witnesses by police and of lawyers by the audience, Mr. Askarov was handed down
a life sentence by the Bazar Kurgan District Court in 2010.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the
Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent
or remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders.

For more
information, please contact:
• FIDH: Arthur Manet / Audrey Couprie: + 33143552518
• OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41228094939 