Human Rights Day: Seizing a historic opportunity to end torture in the Middle East and North Africa - Ten steps against torture
December  9, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Algeria / 2011 / DecemberHuman Rights Day: Seizing a historic opportunity to end torture in the Middle East and North Africa - Ten steps against tortureJOINT STATEMENT ON UN HUMAN
RIGHTS DAY 
Seizing a historic opportunity
to end torture in the Middle East and North Africa
Ten steps against torture
Geneva, 10 December 2011. On the occasion of the UN Human Rights Day, the World Organisation
against Torture (OMCT) and fourteen partner organisations from eight countries in
the Middle East and North Africa (see
below) jointly call on all governments of the region to make the absolute
prohibition of torture and ill-treatment a reality. To this end, OMCT and its
partner organisations have set forth a “10 Steps” agenda outlined below. 
The year 2011 has been marked by the
call for freedom and justice in the Middle East and North Africa. The wave of popular and
peaceful protests sought to overcome repressive regimes in the region
characterized by a widespread practice of torture and ill-treatment committed
with impunity and deeply entrenched in a system of emergency and special laws.
“This is an
important juncture in time with a historic opportunity to bring endemic and
systemic practices of torture and ill-treatment in the region finally to an
end”, said the OMCT and its fourteen partner organisations. “It is thus vital
to ensure that the fight against torture and impunity becomes centre stage in the reform agenda
of countries engaging into genuine transition. Equally, we must not spare any
effort to end the use of torture and seek accountability for those responsible
for the violent repression of dissent and opposition movements.” 
While countries such as Tunisia have embarked in a
transition process incidents of torture continue calling for lasting reforms
that ensure accountability and prevent torture in the future. Other governments of the region have
responded to the nascent protests by initiating certain reforms, such as in Morocco. However,
concerns over continuous practices of torture and ill-treatment, the lack of
steps to fight impunity remain acute as highlighted last week by the UN
Committee Against Torture. 
In others, such as Algeria, reforms have been proposed that would
increase restrictions on fundamental freedoms if they were adopted. The lifting
of the state of emergency had no positive consequences as emergency provisions had
already been incorporated into common law and new legislation fails to provide
vital legal safeguards in detention, and even allows for detention in secret
places. Human rights violations, including torture, arbitrary detentions and
enforced disappearances, continue to be committed by security forces with full impunity.
Furthermore, the implementing decrees of the Charter on Peace and National Reconciliation
remain in force providing blanket amnesties for State agents responsible for the
crimes committed during the conflict in the 90’s. 
While Tunisia and Egypt were the
first countries of the region to hold free elections (Constituent Assembly and parliamentary respectively) and
new opportunities are on the horizon the
legacy of human rights violations is a daunting challenge. Especially in Egypt
there has been little evidence of meaningful reforms to end the widespread
practices of torture as the Supreme Council
of the Armed Forces (SCAF) continues to rely on emergency laws and to use
military courts to try civilians, to violently repress peaceful protests and to
target persons who are perceived to be critical to the authority in place. The
changes in Libya have raised enormous expectations and hopes about an
end to gross human rights violations known under the Ghaddafi regime. However,
the revelations about torture and ill-treatment and arbitrary detention,
including by the forces of the transitional authority, indicate the need for
sustained efforts to prevent torture and to ensure accountability, and the full
cooperation with the International Criminal Court.
In other countries the situation
remains dire, such as Yemen and Bahrain. In particular in Syria security forces continue
to respond to protests with force and the use of torture. In its report
published on 28 November 2011, the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on Syria expressed its grave
concern that crimes against humanity have been committed by Syrian military and
security forces since the repression against protests started in March 2011. Against the background of a defiant response
by Syria
so far, a stronger and unanimous response by the UN, including the Security
Council, must now include a transfer to the International Criminal Court.  
The
protests in the Middle East
and North Africa
may herald the beginning of a new era in the region; there is, however, still a
long way to go before attaining freedom, justice and democracy. The experiences
in Lebanon
following the “spring revolution” in 2005 illustrate the need for lasting
reforms against torture. Despite progress on individual freedoms, the country
is far from having eradicated torture in custody which remains widely practices
by the security forces. 
On the occasion of the universal day
for human rights and to seize the momentum created by the Arab Spring, OMCT and
its fourteen partner organisations
in the region have set forth a “10 Steps” agenda against torture and
accordingly urge the governments of the region and other relevant actors to
fully endorse them. 
Signatories: 
- Forum dignité pour les droits
humains – Morocco 
- Observatoire
marocain des prisons (OMP) – Morocco
- Association marocaine des droits
humains (AMDH)
- Morocco 
- Organisation
marocaine des Droits de l'Homme (OMDH) - Morocco
- Collectif des Familles de Disparus en
Algérie (CFDA) – Algeria 
- Conseil National pour la Liberté en
Tunisie (CNLT) – Tunisia
- Organisation Contre la Torture en
Tunisie (OCTT) – Tunisia
- Ligue Tunisienne pour la Défense
des Droits de l’Homme (LTDH) – Tunisia
- Human Rights Solidarity Libya
– Libya
- Land
Center
for Human Rights (LCHR) – Egypt
- Egyptian Organisation for Human Rights (EOHR) – Egypt
- Lebanese center for human rights (LCHR) – Lebanon
- Syrian Human Rights Organization
Sawassyah – Syria
- Bahrain
Center
for Human Rights – Bahrain 


Ten steps against torture

1)                  
Committing to an end to torture and ill-treatment
As the region is undergoing
transformation governments should express publicly their unequivocal commitment
to end any practice of torture and ill-treatment, to commit to fundamental
reforms strengthening accountability for acts of torture and preventing them in
the future. A clear message needs to be sent to all law enforcement agencies that
acts of torture and ill-treatment will no longer be tolerated. In light of the continuation
of systematic and widespread use of torture in some countries of the region,
such as Syria, governments, including
those in the region, should use their influence within the international
community to ensure that those responsible are held accountable (cf. point
10). 
2)                  
Investigating torture, bringing perpetrators to justice
Torture is a crime under
international law which imposes clear and unambiguous obligations on states to
conduct independent investigations and to bring those responsible to justice.
However, despite recent reforms in some countries there has been limited evidence
of real accountability as of yet. We recall that the obligation to investigate
acts of torture is an immediate one that needs to be conducted ex officio. This
should include also investigations of past abuses to ensure that the victims of
torture are provided with remedies and reparation and to ensure that the right
to truth is fully respected. 
3)                  
Ensuring the right of victims to remedy and reparation
The policies of torture have created
victims which need to be recognized as such. While there is a slowly emerging
acknowledgement of past practices of torture in certain countries, there
remains insufficient recognition of the need to ensure effective remedies and
reparation to victims of torture. Any credible reform process, must be built on
the recognition of torture survivors as victims of a serious human rights
violation, with full entitlement to effective remedies and reparation,
including compensation and access to legal, social and medical rehabilitation.
4)                  
Dismantling the apparatus of repression
Dismantling the apparatus of
repression and ensuring that law enforcement agencies operate within and not
outside the rule of law needs to be a key priority. A plethora of national
security services has been operating under in-transparent mandates, ambiguous
legal basis and lines of command and within a framework that has assured de
jure or de facto impunity for acts of torture. A clear and transparent legal
framework, the separation between intelligence and law enforcement functions
with arrest and detention powers being the provenance of law enforcement, and
effective civilian and judicial oversight are thus core demands.
5)                  
Demilitarizing the justice system and building a protection
system
Long-standing emergency and other
extraordinary laws have created repressive justice system with military,
special or state security courts, often with jurisdiction over civilians and
validating information obtained under torture. These special systems of justice
need to be replaced by the jurisdiction of the ordinary civilian justice
system. Moreover, any credible and viable reform process in the region should
lead to the strengthening of judicial independence, the establishment of
effective remedies, and in countries undergoing constitutional reforms, such as
in Tunisia, may also consider the
establishment of constitutional human rights remedies such as constitutional
courts.
6)                  
Preventing torture and ending incommunicado detention
Torture and ill-treatment are still
a reality today in police custody in the countries of the region, including in
‘ordinary’ criminal cases. Strengthening effective safeguards, such as
immediate access to lawyers from the moment of arrest and without need for
special permission, as well as access to independent medical expertise and
other safeguards against torture must be made a reality. Effective judicial
oversight is equally required to ensure compliance with existing standards. These
standards are equally vital in national security and counter-terrorism cases to
avoid abuse.
7)                  
Establishing independent monitoring, control and oversight
Transparency is the key for
protecting human rights in custody. The ratification of the Optional Protocol
to the UN Convention Against Torture should be an important first step and be
followed-up by the establishment of independent national visiting mechanisms,
that are properly resourced and have access to any place of custody. Moreover,
independent civil society access and monitoring of places of detention is an important
element of democratization that should be embedded in reforms demilitarizing the
penitentiary system to ensure compliance with international standards and
principles of democratic accountability.
8)                  
Providing an enabling framework for human rights defenders
and civil society
A shift away from a control to an
enabling system for human rights organisations, civil society actors that allow
critical human rights reporting needs to be part of any reform process in the
region. This should ensure that laws on association and assembly are brought
fully in compliance with international standards. Authorities should also
ensure that any form of threat or harassment of human rights defenders is
brought to an end and that those responsible are held to account.
9)                  
Making international law against torture key benchmark
The lesson learnt from transition
processes elsewhere is that international human rights standards should be made
a direct part of domestic law and should be one of the benchmarks for the
success of the transition process. This requires the integration of
international standards into domestic law, ways to ensure compliance of
domestic law with such standards, and may include the legal reception of
decisions by universal or regional complaint mechanism. Where not yet done so
states should accede to the UN Convention Against Torture, its Optional
Protocol and accept the jurisdiction of the Committee Against Torture and the
Human Rights Committee to receive individual complaints.
10)              
Strengthening the resolve of the international community
In light of the continuous practices
of torture in parts of the region it is vital that there is a clear response by
the international community to address torture and impunity and to ensure legal
accountability. It is particularly important to ensure that in cases such as
the one in Syria jurisdiction is
transferred to the ICC. We also call for the countries of the region to become
actors for change that speak up for the protection of human rights and initiate
and improve the universal human rights system and its mechanisms. 