Bangladesh:  Bangladesh: Release of Mr. Rafique al-Islam
September 22, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2004 / SeptemberBangladesh: Bangladesh: Release of Mr. Rafique al-IslamCase BGD 300804.3 Follow-up to case BGD 300804 Release  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information regarding the following situation in Bangladesh.   New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source that Mr. Rafique al-Islam, who was arrested on 21 of August 2004, by military officers of the Rapid Reaction Battalion (RAB), was released on bail on 19 September 2004.   Brief reminder of the situation  According to the information received, Mr. Rafique al-Islam, responsible for the activities of the International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL) in Bangladesh and the representative of Nonviolence International in the country, was arrested at his home in Cox’s Bazar, at about 2:30 p.m. on 21 August 2004, by military officers of the Rapid Action Battalion (RAB), an elite force created to combat serious crimes and terrorism in Bangladesh. During the arrest, the RAB members also seized equipment and documents from Mr. Rafique al-Islam’s office. They then took him to Cox’s Bazar prison. His family and his lawyer were not informed of the charges brought against him, which made it difficult for the latter to plan a legal defence for his client. A hearing of the charges against him was due to take place on 26 August 2004, but was postponed to Sunday 29 August 2004.   In the afternoon of 29 August 2004, Mr. Rafique al-Islam was reportedly remanded into the custody of the RAB for the purpose of interrogation. This was of particular concern considering the fact that, according to information received by the Asian Human Rights Commission (a member of the OMCT network), several individuals were arrested and tortured by RAB officials in the beginning of August 2004. The brutal torture of one of the victims allegedly led to his death.  A hearing concerning the detention of Mr. Rafique al-Islam was held on Saturday 4 September 2004. The magistrate ruled that Mr. Rafique al-Islam was to remain in detention. Following the hearing, Mr. Rafique al-Islam’s office was reportedly searched by police, and documents about the International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL) were seized.   On 5 September 2004, the day following the hearing, Mr. Rafique al-Islam was taken to an unknown location. On 14 September 2004, he was charged with possession of ammunition. Authorities had not produced supporting evidence of the charge.   Remarks  The International Secretariat of OMCT welcomes the decision to release Mr. Rafique al-Islam and wishes to thank the individuals and institutions who intervened on Mr. Rafique al-Islam’s behalf.   Geneva, 22 September 2004 