Peru:  Peru: Mr. Maximo Aparco Huincho, who is already gravely ill as a result of ill-treatment, is receiving death threats
August 29, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Peru / 2002 / AugustPeru: Peru: Mr. Maximo Aparco Huincho, who is already gravely ill as a result of ill-treatment, is receiving death threatsCase PER 290802 Torture / Ill-treatment / Death Threats  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Peru.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by REDRESS that Mr. Maximo Aparco Huincho is currently in hospital due to the treatment that he was subjected to during his period of detention in Castro Castro prison, and that Mr. Aparco is now being subjected to death threats.  According to the information received, Mr. Aparco is currently suffering from multi-resistant tuberculosis, a condition he contracted as a result of treatment inflicted on him by the Peruvian authorities during his time in Castro Castro prison, in the aftermath of a massacre launched by the Peruvian State against political prisoners held in cellblocks 1A and 4B of the said prison in 1992. Mr. Aparco is reportedly a witness and a victim of the egregious violations of human rights committed by the Peruvian State under the Alberto Fujimori administration.   According to the information received, Mr. Aparco's case is being considered as a complaint against the Peruvian State by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. A request for provisional measures has also been filed on his behalf, pursuant to Article 25 of the Inter-American Convention on Human Rights.   According to the report, on August 23rd 2002, a delegation of the Inter-American Commission that is currently in Lima, visited Mr. Aparco in hospital. Mr Aparco is reportedly in urgent need of medical treatment, which, in Mr. Aparco's case, is only available through the National Health System - the availability of medical treatment depends entirely on the authorities' decisions.   According to the information received, on August 24th 2002, a woman visited Mr. Aparco, introducing herself as an agent working for the 'The Judiciary Ministry' ('Ministerio Judicial') - a state organ that does not exist in Peru. The woman informed Mr. Aparco that she knew who he was, that she had details about his detention and that she was aware of his family situation including the fact that he has two daughters (naming one of them). The woman proceeded to warn Mr. Aparco that he only has two more months left to live, contrary to what he had been told by the doctors.  The woman reportedly told Mr. Aparco that medical expenses were useless, as Mr. Aparco will die soon, and that he should instead consider dealing with his daughters' situation, as they will soon be without a father. The woman also reportedly tried to question Mr. Aparco about who was paying for his hospitalisation and about the identities of the friends who had visited him during his stay in hospital.  According to the report, it is believed that the woman is either a member of the police (DINCOTE) or the intelligence services, however this remains to be confirmed.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned about the harassment and death threats to which Mr. Maximo Aparco Huincho has been subjected and fears for his physical and psychological integrity. OMCT requests that Mr. Aparco be provided with medical assistance as a matter of urgency. OMCT calls for an investigation into these events, and for the authorities to guarantee Mr. Aparco's security in light of the death threats that have been proffered against him.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Peru urging them to:  i.	Guarantee Mr. Maximo Aparco Huincho's physical and psychological integrity and ensure that he is provided with appropriate medical assistance as a matter of urgency; ii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	Dr. Alejandro Toledo Manrique; Presidente de la República del Perú; Fax: +51 1 427 6722 / 426 6535, E'mail:    oginf@presidencia.gob.pe  Site:  www.peru.gob.pe ·	Dr. Fausto Alvarado Dodero; Ministerio de Justicia del Perú - MINJUS; Scipión Llona 350 - Miraflores, Lima 18 - Perú; Tel.: 51-1-440-4310, E'mail:  webmaster@minjus.gob.pe ·	Dr. Heriberto Benítez; Presidente Comisión de Derechos Humanos del Congreso de la República del Perú; Fax: +51 1 426 2134 ·	Sra.  Nelly Calderón Navarro,  Fiscal de la Nación do Ministério Público de Perú, Fax: (+ 51 1)  426 28 00. E'mail:  webmaster@mpfn.gob.pe   ·	Dr.  Gino Costa Santolalla, Ministro do Ministerio del Interior de Perú, Fax:  (+ 51 1)  225 45 37 / (+ 51 1)  475 29 95. E'mail:  ofitel@mininter.gob.pe    ·	Dr.  Walter Albán Peralta,  Defensor del Pueblo da Defensoria del Pueblo,  Fax:    (+ 51 1)  426 78 89.  E'mail:   defensor@ombudsman.gob.pe  Please also write to the embassies of Peru in your respective country.  Geneva, August 29th, 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 