Azerbaijan:  Sport for Rights coalition condemns conviction of human rights defenders Leyla and Arif Yunus
August 14, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Azerbaijan / 2015 / AugustAzerbaijan: Sport for Rights coalition condemns conviction of human rights defenders Leyla and Arif YunusSFR PR2 pages / 67 KB
The Sport
 for Rights' campaign, of which OMCT is member, has been established to 
raise the problem of political prisoners in the context of the 
forthcoming international sporting events to be hosted by Azerbaijan. 
JOINT STATEMENT
Azerbaijan: Sport for
Rights coalition condemns conviction of human rights defenders Leyla and Arif
Yunus
The Sport for Rights coalition
condemns the conviction and harsh sentencing of Azerbaijani human rights
defenders Leyla and Arif Yunus on 13 August by the Baku Court of Grave Crimes.
After a trial marred by irregularities and due process violations, the court
convicted the couple on politically motivated charges including illegal
entrepreneurship, tax evasion, and fraud, and sentenced Leyla to 8.5 years in
jail, and Arif to seven.
"These sentences are outrageous, and aimed
purely at sanctioning the legitimate work of these two Azerbaijani human rights
defenders. While the heavy sentences are no surprise, they serve to further undermine
Azerbaijan's complete disregard for the international standards of fair trial
and due process", said Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH Honorary
President.
"The unprecedented speed with which the Yunus
trial was carried out is appalling and tells us a lot about its quality. The
judgment is full of inaccuracies due to a total lack of examination of the
evidence provided. Violations of international standards of the right to a fair
trial were obvious”, declared Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of
OMCT.
Leyla, the Director of the Institute
for Peace and Democracy, and Arif, a historian and activist in his own right,
were arrested in July and August 2014, following
Leyla's public calls for a boycott of the inaugural European Games, which were
held in Baku in June 2015. Sport for Rights considered them 'Prisoners of the
Games'. Leyla had also
been working to compile a detailed list of cases of political prisoners, and
was a strong advocate of fundamental freedoms, property rights, and peaceful
resolution of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.
The couple have been held in
separate facilities; Leyla in the Kurdakhani investigative detention unit, and
Arif at the Ministry of National Security’s investigative prison. Leyla
reported being mistreated on several occasions, and Arif reported poor conditions.
Both Leyla and Arif suffer from serious health problems, which have sharply
deteriorated in detention, and have caused delays during trial proceedings,
including on the day of the verdict, when Arif fainted and was attended to by a
doctor. Nonetheless, the authorities resisted calls for their release on
humanitarian grounds, and the court rushed to issue a verdict.
“The health situation of Leyla and Arif Yunus
is extremely worrying and deserves the highest attention of the international
community. Whilst we are thankful for the international attention brought to
the case by some voices, we remain concerned by the lack of action of the
Council of Europe and the European Union. It is clear that the climate of fear
has reached a new low with these sentences and the killing of journalist Rasim
Aliyev”, said Ane Tusvik Bonde, Regional Manager for Eastern
Europe and Caucasus of the Human Rights House Foundation (HRHF).
The Yunus' conviction takes place amidst a broader human rights
crackdown in Azerbaijan, in the aftermath of the European Games and the run-up
to November's parliamentary elections. The same week as the verdict in the
Yunus’ case, journalist Khadija Ismayilova also stood trial, facing serious
jail time on politically motivated charges, and Rasim Aliyev, journalist and
Chairman of the Institute for Reporters’ Freedom and Safety, died in hospital after
being severely beaten. With less than three months until the parliamentary
elections, the Azerbaijani authorities seem determined to continue working
aggressively to silence the few critical voices left in the country.
The Sport for Rights coalition reiterates its call for the immediate and
unconditional release of Leyla and Arif Yunus, as well as the other jailed
journalists and human rights defenders in Azerbaijan. Sport for Rights further
calls for sustained international attention to the country and increased
efforts to hold the Azerbaijani regime responsible for its human rights
obligations in the pre-election environment and beyond.
Supporting organisations:
ARTICLE 19
Canadian Journalists for Free
Expression
Civil Rights Defenders
Freedom Now
Front Line Defenders
Human Rights House Foundation
Index on Censorship
International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders
Norwegian Helsinki Committee
PEN American Centre
Platform
Solidarity with Belarus Information
Office
World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders 