Bangladesh:  Bangladesh: arbitrary arrest and detention of writer and journalist, Shaharier Kabir
December  5, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2001 / DecemberBangladesh: Bangladesh: arbitrary arrest and detention of writer and journalist, Shaharier KabirCase BGD 051201 Arbitrary detention/Freedom of opinion and expression   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Bangladesh.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source of the arbitrary arrest and detention of writer and journalist, Shaharier Kabir, on November 24th, 2001 in Dhaka, Bangladesh.  Mr. Kabir was arrested in accordance with the Special Powers Act of 1974, due to his alleged possession of “inflammatory materials” that could threaten the political stability of the country, according to the authorities.  According to the information received, Mr. Kabir was initially detained by Special Branch police on November 22nd at Dhaka International airport, following his return from Calcutta, where he had his passport, videotapes, as well as other printed materials confiscated.  Mr. Kabir had gone to India to cover the humanitarian situation at the Bangladeshi border, where hundreds of Hindus, who were reportedly suffering religious violence at the hands of supporters of the ruling parties, have taken refuge in India.    According to the information received, Mr. Kabir was then taken to the Special Branch downtown office where he was questioned further.  The Special Branch chief, Maqsudul Haque stated that Mr. Kabir possessed certain information which could place the positive image of the state at risk.  According to the information received, despite the efforts of over two thousand people who gathered on November 23rd in Dhaka to protest police harassment and intimidation against Mr. Kabir, a Khaka Metropolitan Magistrate Court prosecuted and sent Mr. Kabir to prison with a 90 day detention order on Saturday, November 24th.  According to the information received, Mr. Kabir’s relatives have been refused visitation requests by police.  Following his imprisonment, relatives requested for bail in a higher court, however, no decision has been made.  The Secretariat of OMCT condemns the arbitrary arrest and detention of Mr. Shaharier Kabir, which appear to have been conducted primarily for political reasons.  More generally, OMCT is gravely concerned about Bangladesh’s use of harassment against journalists, which constitutes an infringement of the right to exercise the freedoms of expression and opinion.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Bangladesh urging them to:  i.	order Mr. Shaharier Kabir’s immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times; ii.	put an immediate end to the persecution and harassment of Mr. Shaharier Kabir;  iii.	intervene with the appropriate authorities in order to secure that Mr. Shaharier Kabir be allowed to meet with his relatives and lawyers; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	Honourable Prime Minister, Khaleda Zia, Prime Minister of Bangladesh, Prime Minister’s Office, Old Parliament House, Tejgaon, Dhaka, Bangladesh. Fax: 0088 / 02 8113244, 811015, 8113243, e-mail : ps1@pmo.bdonline.com  ·	Mr. Morshed Khan, Foreign Minister, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Segun Bagicha, Dhaka, Fax: 0088 / 02 / 8617448, 0088 / 02 / 9562163, e-mail : pspmo@bangla.net  ·	Mr Alhaj Altaf Hossain Chowdury, Minister of Home Affairs, Government of Peoples Republic of Bangladesh. Fax: 0088 / 02 / 8696667  Please also write to the embassies of Bangladesh in your respective country.  Geneva, December 5, 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 