Russian Federation:  Landmark decision expected in ADC “Memorial” case
December  9, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2013 / DecemberRussian Federation: Landmark decision expected in ADC “Memorial” case

Paris-Geneva, December 9, 2013. On
December 12, 2013, the Anti-Discrimination Centre (ADC) “Memorial” might be
officially declared a “foreign agent” by the Leninsky District Court of St
Petersburg. This is what the prosecutor requested at the last hearing of a
civil process against ADC “Memorial”, on November 25, 2013, according to the
information received by the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders[1].
 
This demand of the prosecutor is unprecedented as for the first time the
court would directly label an NGO a “foreign agent”, and would not just order
it to register as such. If satisfied, this decision will pave the way to
increased harassment of human rights organisations. 
 
Following the introduction of the law on 'foreign agent' in spring 2013,
hundreds of NGOs have been inspected by prosecutors. These inspections resulted
in further unprecedented harassment: as of December 2013 two NGOs have been
suspended, at least 11 have been taken to court, and dozens have received
official notices of violations or warnings not to violate the law. 
 
ADC “Memorial” was first taken to court in April 2013 over the report
submitted back in November 2012 to the UN Committee Against Torture (CAT),
which supposedly proves, according to the prosecutor, its involvement in
political activities and its function as a “foreign agent” as it receives
foreign funding.
 
On November 5, 2013, the prosecutor contested a court decision
favourable to ADC “Memorial” in a previous administrative case. In a protest
sent to the City Court of Saint Petersburg he went beyond the report submitted
to the CAT and claimed that “due to the constant nature of the activities of
ADC “Memorial”, it can be concluded that the offence it committed has a lasting
character” and is “inseparable from all other types of its activities”. 
 
“In short, the
prosecutor now claims that all the activity of ADC Memorial is unlawful and so
questions its very existence as a human rights organisation”, said Karim Lahidji, FIDH President. “The international community should
observe the December-12 hearing against ADC Memorial and give it an appropriate
assessment”, he added.
 
“ADC Memorial is not a foreign agent, neither are the other
targeted NGOs. These trials only aim to impeach and undermine their legitimate
activities”, said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock. “We call upon the Russian authorities to put an end to this escalating
harassment of NGOs. Ultimately,
human rights are in the national interest of any democratic State”,
he added.
 
Moreover, on November 26, 2013 the Kirov District Court of Saratov
ordered the Centre for Social Policy and Gender Studies to register as a
“foreign agent”, in similar civil proceedings. The prosecutor, acting in the
“interest of the Russian Federation”, argued that the Centre engaged in
political activities for which it had received foreign funding, after the
Centre published a book entitled “Critical analysis of the social policy in the
post-Soviet space” and organised a follow-up event. This is the first such
court decision issued in a civil process under the law on “foreign agents”. The
Centre will appeal the decision.
 
Background information 
 
ADC “Memorial” faces two cases: administrative and civil. In both cases
the prosecutor argues that ADC Memorial is a foreign agent as in November 2012
it submitted a report to the CAT entitled “Roma, migrants, activists: victims
of police abuse”. 
 
The civil case is based on Article 45, part 1 of the Code on Civil
Procedure, which allows the prosecutor to turn to the court on behalf of an
“unspecified group of citizens”. The prosecutor argues that by failing to
register as a “foreign agent”, ADC “Memorial” broke the law and continues to
mislead this “unspecified group” about its activities. 
 
The administrative case against ADC “Memorial” was lodged by the
prosecutor in April 2013 and was rejected in May 2013 by the Mirovoy Court no.
8 of St Petersburg. The court found that the evidence brought by the
prosecutor’s office was inconclusive and insufficient to prove that the ADC
Memorial was a “foreign agent”. All the appeals and “protests”[2] of
the prosecutor were likewise rejected. The court stipulated that there were no
legal grounds for the very inspection of ADC Memorial's premises in the spring
of 2013. 
 
In Russia administrative processes can only concern offences committed
within the past three months, so the case of ADC “Memorial” is already long
expired. Despite this, on November 5, 2013, the prosecutor lodged a new
“protest” to the City Court of Saint
Petersburg, where he demands that the court cancel the decision of the District
Court.
 
For more information,
please contact:
·     FIDH: Arthur Manet/Audey Couprie: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
·     OMCT: Delphine
Reculeau: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39



[1] A joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT).


[2] A "protest" is another way in which a prosecutor can appeal
decisions, including decisions of courts in administrative cases. 