China:  Human rights defender Hu Jia released, but still under surveillance, while others remain detained
June 28, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / China / 2011 / JuneChina: Human rights defender Hu Jia released, but still under surveillance, while others remain detainedPRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

 
 
PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA: Human rights defender Hu Jia 
released, but still under surveillance, while others remain 
detained
 
Geneva-Paris, June 28, 2011. The Observatory for the Protection of 
Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against 
Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), 
welcomes the release of Mr. Hu Jia, an HIV/AIDS activist and former Director of the Beijing Aizhixing 
Institute for Health Education as well as laureate of the 2008 Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought. Yet, it 
expresses its concern about his continuing surveillance and the ongoing 
detention of other human rights defenders.
 
On June 26, 2011, Mr. Hu Jia was released from Beijing Municipal Prison, after completing a 
three-and-a-half-year sentence. Yet, he is now subjected to a one-year 
deprivation of his political rights. Moreover, the police have reportedly 
blocked the entrance to his home, and other human rights defenders would have 
been warned by the authorities not to attempt to contact 
him.
 
Mr. Hu Jia had been arrested on December 27, 2007 and was sentenced in April 2008 to three years 
and six months’ imprisonment and one year of deprivation of his political rights 
for “inciting subversion of State power” by the Beijing Municipal No. 1 
Intermediate People’s Court. The court’s only ground for convicting Mr. Hu consisted of his 
articles, press interviews, personal letters, testimony to European Parliament 
through Internet, and an open letter he signed, demanding to end the 
pre-Olympics human rights abuses. While in detention, Mr. Hu Jia’s health condition seriously deteriorated. However, 
several applications for release on medical parole were all 
denied.
 
The Observatory was also informed of the release from a prison in Chengdu of Mr. Huang Qi, Director of the Tianwang Human Rights Centre, on June 10, 2011, after 
completing a three-year term for “illegal possession of State secrets”. Mr. 
Huang had been arrested on June 10, 2008 after he provided aid to victims of the Sichuan earthquake and 
published information on his website about the plight of parents who had lost 
their children. In August 2009, Mr. Huang Qi had been tried in a closed trial before the Wuhou District 
Court, Chengdu city, which did issued its verdict only in 
November.
 
The Observatory welcomes Messrs. Hu Jia and Huang Qi’s 
release, but remains deeply concerned by Mr. Hu’s ongoing surveillance, 
which seem to merely aim at sanctioning his human rights activities. 

 
The Observatory further recalls that several human rights defenders 
currently remain detained, including Mr. Qi Chonghuai, a reporter and former Shandong 
Bureau Chief for the Fazhi Morning Post, who was sentenced on June 9, 2011 to eight additional years in prison for “extortion and blackmail and 
embezzlement”. Mr. Qi, who had been arrested on June 25, 2007 and sentenced to 
four years in prison in May 2008 for “extortion and blackmail” after reporting 
on corruption in Tengzhou city, Shandong province, was to complete his four-year 
term on June 25, 2011. He remains detained in Zaozhuang prison, in Tengzhou. 

 
Moreover, as of today, the whereabouts of Mr. Gao Zhisheng, Director of the Beijing-based Shengzhi Law Office, who took on high-profile human rights cases, remain unknown. Mr. Gao, 
who had been under constant police surveillance, along with his family, since 
receiving a suspended sentence for “inciting subversion” in 2006, was last heard 
on April 20, 2010. He had just reappeared on March 28, 2010, when he had 
detailed the torture he had been subjected to during the 14 months of detention 
he had just spent.
 
Accordingly, the Observatory urges the Chinese authorities to guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological 
integrity of Messrs. Qi Chonghuai and 
Gao Zhisheng as well as of all human rights defenders arbitrarily 
detained and to release them immediately and unconditionally since their detention is 
arbitrary as it only aims at sanctioning their human rights activities. 

 
The Observatory also urges the Chinese authorities to put an end to any acts of harassment, including at the judicial 
level, against Messrs. Qi Chonghuai, 
Gao Zhisheng, Hu Jia and Huang Qi and more generally against all human rights defenders in the 
People’s Republic of China.
 
More generally, the Observatory calls upon the Chinese authorities to 
comply with the relevant international norms and standards, in particular the 
United Nations (UN) Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN 
General Assembly on December 9, 1998, and international human rights standards and international instruments 
ratified by the People’s Republic of China. The Observatory also urges the European Commission Delegation as 
well as European Union (EU) Member-States embassies in the People’s Republic of China to call upon the Chinese authorities to comply with the relevant 
international norms and standards and take action on this situation, in line 
with the EU Guidelines on Human Rights Defenders.
 
For more information please contact:
·  OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 39
·  FIDH: Karine Appy, Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18 