Egypt:  Travel ban on Mozn Hassan, Founder and Executive Director of Nazra for Feminist Studies
June 28, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2016 / JuneEgypt: Travel ban on Mozn Hassan, Founder and Executive Director of Nazra for Feminist Studies



URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
EGY 004 / 0616 / OBS 049.5
Judicial
harassment / Restrictions to freedom of association / 
Restrictions
to freedom of movement
Egypt
June 28, 2016

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
Egypt. 
 
New Information:

The Observatory has been informed by
reliable sources about the ongoing judicial harassment and restrictions to
freedom of association faced by at least 37 Egyptian human rights defenders and
organisations, including the Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies (CIHRS)
and the Egyptian Initiative for Personal
Rights (EIPR), two member organisations of FIDH, the
Arab Network for Human Rights Information (ANHRI), the Hisham
Mubarak Law Center (HMLC), Nazra for Feminist Studies, as well as the Arab
Center for the Independence of the Judiciary and the Legal Profession (ACIJLP)
and the Land Center for Human Rights (LCHR), two member organisations of OMCT. 
 
According to
the information received on June 27, 2016 Ms. Mozn Hassan, Founder and Executive Director of Nazra for Feminist
Studies, was informed by authorities at the Cairo International Airport that a
travel ban had been imposed on her, preventing her from attending and
participating in the Executive Committee meeting for the Women Human Right
Defenders (WHRD) Regional Coalition for the Middle East and North Africa, as
the Regional Expert for the coalition, taking place during the period of June
27th to July 1st, 2016. We believe that this travel ban
was ordered within the framework of Case No. 173/2011, commonly known as the
“NGO Foreign Funding Case”. This case was reopened a few months ago to pursue
its investigations.                          
 
The Observatory recalls that on March 22, 2016, Ms. Mozn Hassan was formally accused of
receiving foreign funds without authorisation, and throughout the month of
March 2016, a number of NGO staff members were summoned to appear before the
Investigating Judge.
 
These developments are the latest escalation in a campaign of judicial
harassment launched by the authorities in 2011 targeting civil society
organisations and human rights defenders in Egypt[1].

 
The Observatory strongly condemns the travel
ban imposed on Ms. Mozn Hassan as well as the ongoing judicial harassment
against her, which only aim at sanctioning her legitimate human rights
activities. Therefore, the Observatory calls on the Egyptian authorities to
immediately lift the travel ban and cease all acts of judicial harassment
against Ms. Mozn Hassan. 
 
More generally, the Observatory
urges the Egyptian authorities to immediately put an end to all acts of
harassment against human rights defenders and their relatives, as well as NGOs,
and to comply with its Constitution (in particular Article 78 and Article 93,
which respectively recognise freedom of association and Egypt's compliance with ratified international human rights conventions) as well as its international legal
obligations (in particular Article 22 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights (ICCPR)) and its international commitment to respect
freedom of association in the framework of its Universal Periodic Review (UPR)[2].

 
Background information:
 
Since 2011, the Egyptian Government has launched a judicial harassment
campaign against civil society organisations on the pretext that they received
unauthorised foreign funding under criminal case No. 173/2011, known as the
“foreign funding case against NGOs”.
 
The 2011 Government Fact-Finding Committee report, which formed the
basis of the first trial in 2012, listed 37 NGOs who could be targeted under
this “foreign funding case against NGOs”. That list included ACIJLP, CIHRS,
LCHR, the Egyptian Democratic Academy (EDA), HMLC, ANHRI, EIPR, El Nadim Center
for the Management and Rehabilitation of Victims of Violence and Torture, the
Egyptian Center for Economic and Social Rights (ECESR), the Arab Penal Reform
Organization, the Egyptian Center for the Right to Education, El-Haq, the
Egyptian Association for Community Participation Enhancement (ACPE), Nazra for
Feminist Studies, the Appropriate Communications Technologies (ACT), among
others.
 
The first set of investigations targeted international and foreign NGOs.
On June 4, 2013, the North Cairo Criminal Court sentenced 43 Egyptian and
foreign staff members of five foreign civil society organisations to
imprisonment ranging from one (suspended) to five years of prison for “managing
unlicensed branches” of their organisations, “conducting research, political
training, surveys, and workshops without licenses”, “training political parties
and groups” and “illegally receiving foreign funding”. Though none of the
defendants were forced to serve their sentences either because they were abroad
or in the case of the junior staff had their sentences suspended, the court
ordered the confiscation of their funds and the closure of Egypt-based branches
of Freedom House, the International Republican Institute, the National
Democratic Institute, the International Centre for Journalists (ICFJ), and
Konrad Adenauer Foundation. 
 
The
second case targets Egyptian civil society organisations that have received
foreign or international funding. It started with the ultimatum made by the
Ministry of Social Solidarity (MoSS)[3]
for Egyptian human rights organisations to register by late 2014 under Law
84/2002 or face closure. One month later, a new wave of harassment targeting
human rights NGOs began. 
 
In
September 2014, President Al-Sisi signed into law amendments to Article 78 of
the Penal Code. These amendments include the provision that receiving foreign
funding for the purpose of “harming national security” is punishable by life
imprisonment.
 
In
late 2014, the Investigating Judge in charge of the case appointed a technical
committee from the MoSS[4]
to determine whether Egyptian organisations under review operate as civic
associations without being registered as such under Law 84/2002, and to examine
documents related to their sources of funding. The committee first examined the
EDA. It is noteworthy to note that despite the
EDA's registration in compliance with the ultimatum[5],
they are still being investigated. In January 2015, the judge issued
travel bans against Messrs. Hossam al-Din Ali, Chairman of the EDA, Ahmed
Ghoneim, Deputy, as well as Ms. Israa Abdel Fattah and Bassem
Samir, who previously worked in the same organisation.
 
In
June 2015, Mr. Negad El Borai, the
Director of United Group, was interrogated by the
Investigating Judge about its sources of funding and legal status[6]. In March 2016, the United Group was summonsed for the
fourth time. On May 17, 2016, he was summonsed for the fifth hearing session[7],
but at the very last minute it was postponed to an undetermined date.
On June 9, 2015, the Investigating
Judge mandated the technical committee to visit the Cairo office of the CIHRS
in order to examine whether the CIHRS engages in activities of civic
associations under the provisions of Law 84/2002. The committee requested the
staff present in the office to provide documentation relating to the
administration of the NGO, such as its registration, founding contract and
statute, as well as the budgets, financial accounts, and funding contracts for
the past four years. One additional demand the staff were instructed to comply
with was to provide documentation that proved that the CIHRS was not conducting
NGO work. 
 
On June 16, 2015, the CIHRS was presented with a summons letter to
appear on June 17, before the Investigating Judge within the framework of the
case No. 173/2011. However, the CIHRS refused to accept the summons letter as
it failed to comply with the legal requirements in force and subsequently submitted its arguments in writing to the
representative of the Investigating Judge. Since then, CIHRS and its members
had not received any further summons, until those of March 13 and 14, 2016 (see
below).
 
In July 2015, the HMLC was also subjected to the same review.
 
In December 2015, the ANHRI received a phone call from the technical
committee, which asked to conduct an inspection, but due to the absence of
ANHRI’s Director, Mr. Gamal Eid, the visit was postponed and eventually
did not take place. 
 
In December 2015, the Egyptian Center for the Right to Education was
summoned by the Investigating Judge for questioning.
 
On February 4, 2016, Mr. Gamal
Eid was informed of a travel ban as he was attempting to travel outside
Egypt. Mr. Hossam
Bahgat, founder of EIPR, was informed of a similar ban on February 23,
2016.
 
On March 13 and 14,  two staff
members of CIHRS and three staff members of Nazra for Feminist Studies were
notified by telephone of a summons to appear on March 16 before the
Investigating Judge in Cairo within the framework of criminal case No.
173/2011. However, the two staff members of CIHRS refused to appear, as they
had not been properly notified in person in accordance with the law in force[8].
Two former staff members of the Andalus Institute for Tolerance and
Anti-Violence Studies and one accountant from the United Group were also
summoned within the same context.
 
On March 17, Messrs. Hossam Bahgat and Gamal Eid were informed that the
Investigative Judge had ordered the freezing of their assets and that their
case would be reviewed by the Cairo Criminal Court in Zeinhom on March 24,
2016. The case was subsequently adjourned to April 20, 2016, upon request from
the Public Prosecutor. 
 
On April 19, Mr. Bahey eldin
Hassan, CIHRS Director, two staff members of CIHRS, as well as Mr. Moustafa
El Hassan, HMLC Director, were informed at 9pm through a phone call from
the Egyptian police that they were summoned to appear before the Cairo Criminal
Court in Zeinhom on April 20, along with Messrs. Bahgat and Eid.
 
On April 20, the Cairo Criminal Court in Zeinhom added seven defendants
from three additional NGOs to the “asset freeze order” initially targeting Messrs. Hossam Bahgat and Gamal Eid.

 
The additional defendants are Mr. Bahey eldin Hassan, Mr. Moustafa El
Hassan, Mr. Abdel Hafiz Tayel, Executive
Director of the Egyptian Center for the Right to Education, two staff members
of CIHRS, as well as of Mr. Bahey eldin Hassan's wife and daughter and Mr.
Gamal Eid's wife and daughter[9].

 
The hearing by the Cairo Criminal Court in Zeinhom regarding the asset
freeze order was postponed several times by the prosecutors to review the
evidence and formally summon the new defendants. On May 23, 2016, it was again
adjourned to July 17, 2016. 
 
On May 27, Mr. Mohamed Zaree, CIHRS Egypt Director, was informed by the
authorities at Cairo International Airport that a travel ban had been imposed
on him based on an order by an investigative judge. We believe this travel ban
was ordered within the framework of the “foreign funding case against NGOs. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Egypt asking them to:
 
i. Immediately put an end to investigations and criminal cases targeting
NGOs as well as human rights defenders and their relatives;
 
ii. Put an end to all forms of harassment against all human rights
organisations and defenders in Egypt, including travel bans;
 
iii. Revise the Law on Associations to comply with international human
rights standards and the UPR commitments made by Egypt, while ensuring that
independent civil society organisations are meaningfully consulted in the
drafting process;
 
iv. Comply with
all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
in particular with:
- its Article 1, which provides that “everyone has the right,
individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the
protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the
national and international levels”;
- its Article 5(a): “For the purpose of promoting and protecting human
rights and fundamental freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, at the national and international levels (a) To meet
or assemble peacefully”
- its Article 6(a), which foresees that “everyone has the right,
individually and in association with others, to participate in peaceful
activities against violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms”;
- its Article 12.2, which provides
that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by
the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with
others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de
jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
present Declaration”;
 
v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Egypt.
 
Addresses:
President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, H.E. Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, Fax:
+202 23901998
Prime Minister of Egypt, Mr. Sherif Ismail, Fax: + 202 2735 6449 /
27958016. Email: primemin@idsc.gov.eg
Minister of the Interior of Egypt, Mr. Magdy Abdel Ghaffar, E-mail: moi1@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2579 2031 / 2794
5529
Minister of Justice of Egypt, Mr. Mohamed Hossam Abdel-Rehim, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2795 8103
Public Prosecutor, Fax: +202 2577 4716
President of the National Council For Human Rights, Mr. Mohamed Fayeq,
Fax: + 202 25747497 / 25747670. Email: nchr@nchr.org.eg
H.E. Ms. Wafaa Bassim,
Ambassador, Permanent
Mission of Egypt to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Email: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41 22 738 44 15
Embassy of Egypt
in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 675.58.88; Email: embassy.egypt@skynet.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Egypt in
your respective country.
 
***


Geneva-Paris,
June 28, 2016
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
The Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture,
is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them
concrete support in their time of need. 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·      
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49
39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25
18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
 
 



[1]                
The investigation started in September 2011, and the raid on NGOs took place in
December 2011. As the investigation has been ongoing for nearly five years, the
scope of the case remains unknown. For more information, please see: http://www.cihrs.org/?p=720&lang=en &
http://www.cihrs.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/The-Complaint.pdf


[2]                 At the occasion of the UPR of
Egypt in November 2014, the Egyptian authorities accepted at least five
recommendations on the protection of human rights defenders, including a
commitment to reforming the current NGO law with a wide consultation of NGOs,
and a commitment to guarantee the right to freedom of association in accordance
with international standards.


[3]                 The ultimatum was made public
in July 2014, and in September 2014, the deadline was pushed back to November
10, 2014.


[4]                 The committee is composed of
Ministry of Social Solidarity officials but they report to the Investigating
Judge. 


[5]                 The EDA has been registered
under the Associations Law No. 84/2002 since
September 2014.


[6]                
The United Group is a law firm established 50 years ago, and headed by
Mr. Negad El Borai, one of Egypt’s most influential human rights defenders and
lawyers.


[7]            See the Observatory’s Urgent
Appeal EGY 002 / 0516 /
OBS 042, issued on May 17, 2016. 


[8]                  The three staff
members of Nazra will be represented by a lawyer.


[9]                
Mr. Bahgat attended the April-20 hearing, while the other defendants were
represented by their lawyers. No formal charges were confirmed on that
occasion. 