Vatican (Holy See):  UN Committee Against Torture criticises Holy See over child sexual abuse
May 23, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / Vatican (Holy See) / 2014 / MayVatican (Holy See): UN Committee Against Torture criticises Holy See over child sexual abuse
Geneva (Switzerland), 23
May 2014.The
UN has condemned the Holy See’s failure to prevent torture or ill-treatment
committed by Catholic clergy worldwide, and called for the Holy See to ensure redress
for victims of sexual abuse.
The UN Committee Against Torture has
criticised the Holy See’s failure to prevent, stop, sanction and provide
redress for child sexual abuse committed by Catholic Church officials worldwide.
The Holy See must “take steps to ensure that victims of sexual abuse committed
by or with the acquiescence of the State party’s officials receive redress,
including fair, adequate and enforceable right to compensation and as full
rehabilitation as possible, regardless of whether perpetrators of such acts
have been brought to justice”, says the Committee Against Torture (UNCAT) in a report of concluding observations, which was
released today following the Committee’s review of the State earlier this
month. 
CRIN and OMCT welcome UNCAT’s report
on the Holy See, which almost entirely focuses on child sexual abuse in the
Catholic Church. In the report the Committee rejects the Holy See’s claim that
it is not responsible for abuses committed outside the Vatican City State,
reminding the Holy See that its obligations under the Convention Against
Torture (CAT) extend to Holy See officials worldwide, “wherever they exercise
effective control over persons or territory”.
The Committee highlights the Holy
See’s failure to provide specific information on its handling of cases of child
sexual abuse, and expresses concern over reports that Holy See officials resist
the principle of mandatory reporting of abuse allegations to civil authorities
and have declined to provide information to civil authorities. The Committee
also expresses concern over numerous reports of cases in which clergy accused
or convicted of such offences were transferred to other dioceses where they
remained in contact with children and in some cases continued to abuse
children. Furthermore, the Committee expresses deep concern at the inability of
many victims to obtain redress for abuse perpetrated by or with the
acquiescence of Holy See officials.
In a long list of recommendations,
the Committee calls on Holy See officials to:
●     
ensure effective monitoring of the conduct of all
individuals under their effective control, and immediately suspend individuals
suspected of abuse and prevent their transfer;
●     
report allegations of abuse to civil authorities and
cooperate with their investigation and prosecution;
●     
apply meaningful sanctions to those who fail to exercise
due diligence and react properly to such allegations;
●     
establish an independent complaints mechanism for
victims; and 
●     
ensure that victims of sexual abuse committed by or
with the acquiescence of Holy See officials receive redress, including fair, adequate
and enforceable right to compensation and as full rehabilitation as possible.
During its review by UNCAT, the Holy
See delegation indicated that the
Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith had dealt with 3420 credible
allegations of sexual abuse by priests between 2004-2013, resulting in the
defrocking of 848 priests and disciplining of 2572 others. However, the Holy
See failed to provide requested data on the number of cases in which it
provided information to civil authorities in the places where the cases arose
and in the places where the priests concerned are currently located.
In its response to the concluding observations, the
Holy See rejects UNCAT’s implied assumption that any sexual abuse amounts to
torture under CAT as “fundamentally flawed, misleading, and ultimately
counter-productive”.
Child sexual abuse in the Catholic
Church was included in UNCAT’s review because of the efforts of NGOs, including Child Rights
International Network (CRIN) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT),
who submitted evidence to the UN. In their
joint submission to the Committee, CRIN and OMCT
emphasise that, by acquiescing to rape and other forms of sexual abuse
committed worldwide by Catholic clergy and others operating under the Holy
See’s authority, the Holy See has failed its duties to prevent torture and
other acts of ill-treatment within its jurisdiction, thereby violating CAT.
UNCAT’s criticism of the Holy See
follows the State’s historic review earlier this year by another UN human rights
body, the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, where the Holy See was
rebuked for having “consistently placed the preservation of the reputation of
the Church and the protection of the perpetrators above children’s best
interests.”
The Holy See’s review by UNCAT was
part of the Committee’s 52nd session, in which Cyprus, Guinea, Lithuania,
Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Thailand and Uruguay were also scrutinised for their
adherence to CAT. 

Further
information: 
●     
UNCAT’s concluding observations on the Holy See.

●     
“Unofficial minutes” taken by CRIN an OMCT of
UNCAT’s review of the Holy See. 
●     
Alternative report submitted by OMCT and CRIN
to UNCAT for the Holy See’s review. 
●     
CRIN’s report mapping the global scale of child sexual
abuse in the Catholic Church: “Child sexual abuse and the Holy See: the need for
justice, accountability and reform”.
●     
CRIN’s campaign: End sexual violence in religious institutions.
●     
#VaticanAccountability on Twitter. 
For further information,
please contact:
OMCT, Ms Carolina
Barbara, Child Rights Coordinator, Tel. +41 (0) 22 809 49 39, Email: cb@omct.org
CRIN, Ms Veronica Yates,
Director, Tel. +44 (0) 20 7401 2257, Email: vyates@crin.org
Notes to editors
The
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) is today the main coalition of
NGOs fighting against torture, summary executions, enforced disappearances and
all other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. With 311 affiliated
organisations in its SOS-Torture Network and many tens of thousands
correspondents in every country, OMCT is the most important network of
non-governmental organisations working for the protection and the promotion of
human rights in the world.
Child
Rights International Network (CRIN) is a global research, policy and
advocacy organisation. Our work is grounded in the United Nations Convention on
the Rights of the Child.Our goalisa world where children's rights are recognised, respected and enforced, and
where every rights violation has a remedy. Our work is based on five core
values:
- We believe in rights, not charity
- We are stronger when we work
together
- Information is power and it should
be free and accessible
- Societies, organisations and
institutions should be open, transparent and accountable 
- We believe in promoting children's
rights, not ourselves. 