Bahrain:  Implementation of even more draconian measures against fundamental freedoms: further risks for human rights defenders!
August 13, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2013 / AugustBahrain: Implementation of even more draconian measures against fundamental freedoms: further risks for human rights defenders!

Paris-Geneva, August 13, 2013. Ahead of
peaceful protest planned in Manama on August 14, the King of Bahrain banned any
protest and sit-in in the Capital and ordered the implementation of a set of
draconian measures which will further jeopardise a number fundamental freedoms
in the Kingdom, thus putting human rights defenders activities at further risk.
 
On
August 1, 2013, the King of Bahrain ordered the implementation of a set of 22
recommendations that were adopted in the framework of an exceptional session of
the National Council (NC) held on July 29, 2013.
 
Such
recommendations include:
 
-    the “loss of Bahraini
citizenship for all those who commit crimes of terrorism and incitement to
terrorism”
-    the “ban of all
sit-ins, assemblies and protests in the capital Manama”
-    the provision of
security forces with the “necessary and appropriate mandate to protect the
society from terrorism”
-    the importance of
“notifying ambassadors of foreign countries to not intervene in the internal
affairs of Bahrain, and respect international law”
-    a recommendation to
“all relevant state bodies to implement the legal procedures against all those
who use social media in an illegal manner, and to increase the penalty against
all those who use websites to publish false information to foreign agencies,
which jeopardises the stability and security of the country”
-    the interpretation of
the non-violation of the fundamental freedoms, especially freedom of
expression, in a manner that balances implementation of the law and the
maintaining of human rights.
 
These
measures amount to the implementation of some kind of new state of emergency
granting the authorities excessive powers allowing them to arbitrarily restrain
fundamental rights such as freedom of expression and freedom of association. 
 
The
unprecedented repressive character of such recommendations could result in
further muzzling human rights activities in the country, in view of the broad
interpretation of “terrorism” generally applied against human rights defenders
and peaceful opponents. 
 
Indeed,
the fact that the authorities have already announced that the August 14 protest
would be severely repressed if actually held is a clear indication that
political opponents and human rights defenders may be considered “terrorists”
and fall within the scope of the new legislation.
 
In
addition, the degree of detail of some of the recommendations aims at directly
targeting the legitimate and peaceful activities carried out by a number of
Bahraini human rights defenders and human rights organisations in the country
and abroad.
 
The
Observatory is all the more concerned as on August 9, 2013, Ms. Maryam
Al-Khawaja, Acting President of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR),
Co-Director of the Gulf Center for Human Rights (GCHR) and a Bahraini citizen
living abroad, was denied boarding a British Airways flight to Bahrain. At the
counter of the Copenhagen airport, she was informed by an employee that the
denial was based upon “orders from the Bahrain Government”. The employee added
that it was the first time she had witnessed such a situation in her daily
work. Ms. Al-Khawaja mentioned to the employees that she was a Bahraini citizen
and that she had travelled to Bahrain with British Airways in January 2013, but
to no avail. British Airways later stated that the company had to “respect
individual government requests”, without providing more details. Ms. Al-Khawaja
is contemplating ways to lodge a legal action.
 
Ms.
Al-Khawaja was planning to monitor the situation on the ground during the
August 14 planned protests in Bahrain, and to visit her detained father, human
rights defender Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja, currently serving life
imprisonment for his peaceful human rights activities. She was also planning to
visit her sister, human rights defender Zainab Al-Khawaja, also detained
at the Isa Town Female Detention Centre. On May 22, 2013, Ms. Zainab Al Khawaja
and Ms. Masooma Al Sayed, both known for their participation in peaceful
gatherings calling for reforms and the respect of human rights in Bahrain, were
sentenced by the Manama lower criminal court to three months and six months’ imprisonment,
respectively, for “illegal gathering”, “assaulting a female officer” and
“inciting hatred against the regime” in reference to events that go back to
December 2011[1].

 
     The
Observatory firmly denounces the intensifying crackdown on the Bahraini civil
society, and reiterates its call on the Bahraini authorities to comply with the
international human rights instruments ratified by the Kingdom of Bahrain, with
the 1998 UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.


[1] On December 16, 2011, Ms.
Al Khawaja had staged a sit-in to call for reforms and more rights at Abu Saiba
roundabout and was joined by several women. The riot police fired teargas
canisters and then handcuffed her and dragged across the pavement by her
handcuffs. She was further cursed and beaten in the police station. See Joint
BCHR-Observatory Press Release, June 21, 2013. 