Sri Lanka:  Suspend General Silva’s Credentials to Promote Justice
November  9, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sri Lanka / 2011 / NovemberSri Lanka: Suspend General Silva’s Credentials to Promote JusticeNovember 9, 2011
Mr.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
United Nations
2 United Nations
Plaza
New York, N.Y.
10017
Re: Suspend
General Silva’s Credentials to Promote Justice
Dear Mr.
Secretary-General:
We write to ask
you to urge the United Nations Credentials Committee to recommend that the
General Assembly suspend the credentials of General Shavendra Silva to appear
at the United Nations as a Representative of Sri Lanka.  As you know, General Silva is being sued in
the Southern District Court of New York for the extrajudicial killing of a
civilian in the bombing of a hospital and for the torture and extrajudicial
killing of a person hors de combat. 
Overwhelming
evidence showing that the Government of Sri Lanka perpetrated war crimes and
crimes against humanity compels the suspension of General Silva’s
credentials.  This evidence has been
collected under your direction by the Panel of Experts and was presented to you
in an in-depth report.  That report
identified serious violations of international law and concluded that Sri
Lanka’s conduct during the war amounted to an assault on the legal regime
designed to protect civilians and mitigate atrocities during armed
conflict.  Last month, in an
acknowledgement of the severity of the evidence, you forwarded the Panel’s
report to the Human Rights Council.  These U.N. efforts have raised victims’ hopes
for justice and accountability for Sri Lanka’s war crime atrocities.
Although the Sri
Lankan Government has an obligation to investigate and redress these crimes, it
has failed to establish a mechanism for accountability that meets international
standards, and has instead relied on its widely condemned Lessons Learnt and
Reconciliation Commission.  Rather than
investigate General Silva for his responsibility in committing war crimes, the
Government has rewarded him with a diplomatic position. Similarly, Sri Lanka
has posted 22 former high-ranking military officials to diplomatic posts around
the world, from the United States to Australia to Germany.  Efforts to bring them to justice where they
are posted are now proliferating, as the global movement for accountability
grows.  Sri Lanka should not be rewarded
with unlimited immunity for war crimes for militarizing its diplomatic
positions.
Inaction regarding
General Silva’s credentials would impede the course of justice.  Victims of war crimes in Sri Lanka deserve
better from the largest international body designed to protect peace and
justice.  The world is closely watching
these developments.  As many do, we fear
that permitting General Silva to retain his credentials would send a message to
law-breaking governments around the world that the United Nations will not
defend the cause of justice and that it will shelter war criminals and
perpetrators of mass atrocities.  
By encouraging the
Credentials Committee to recommend to the General Assembly that General Silva’s
credentials be suspended during the pendency of the New York litigation, you
will protect justice and the rule of law. 
The plaintiffs in this suit seek only their day in court before a jury
of neutral fact-finders — an opportunity that does not exist anywhere else in
the world, currently or for the foreseeable future.  If the General Assembly decides to suspend or
revoke General Silva’s credentials, this will help allow a neutral jury to
assess the case against him.  I urge you
to encourage the Credentials Committee to recommend to the General Assembly
that General Silva’s credentials be suspended, and thereby ensure that the
victims of torture and war crimes have their day in court. 
Sincerely,
SPEAK Human Rights
and Environmental Initiative
UNROW Human Rights
Impact Litigation Clinic at
American University
Washington College of Law
Center
for Constitutional Rights
Allard
K. Lowenstein International Human Rights Clinic at Yale Law School
Human
Rights USA
World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
European
Center for Constitutional and Human Rights
TRIAL
Campaign Against Criminalising Communities
Society for
Threatened Peoples 