India:  Alleged extrajudicial killing of Mr. Khalil Sk by Border Security Force (BSF)
October 20, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / India / 2011 / OctoberIndia: Alleged extrajudicial killing of Mr. Khalil Sk by Border Security Force (BSF)Case IND 201011
Alleged
extra-judicial killing/ Allegation of torture and ill-treatment/ Lack of effective
investigation
The International
Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requestsyour
URGENT intervention in
the following situation in India/ West Bengal.
Brief description of the situation
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been
informed by Banglar
Manabadhikar Suraksha Mancha
(MASUM), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the alleged extra-judicial
killing of Mr. Khalil Sk, an
Ayurvedic practioner aged about 32 years old and residing in the village of Godhanpara Sameshpara, in the district of Murshidabad. 
According to the information received, in the evening
of 8 October 2011, Messrs.
Khalil Sk, his brother, Mr. Mikchar Sk, and his brother-in-law, Mr. Mustafa
Siraj, were on their way home after having visited an ailing relative living in
the district of Rajsahi, in Bangladesh. At the border
with India, they had to
wait until 11 pm before being
able to cross it. When they eventually came near to the Border Security Force
(BSF) out-post nos. 1 & 2 under Char Mourasi BSF Camp, about five soldiers reportedly
started chasing them, without giving any reason. Messrs. Mikchar Sk. and
Mustafa Siraj managed to escape, but Mr. Khalil Sk got caught by the BSF
soldiers. 
According to the same
information, Mr. Khalil Sk’s dead body was found by local people between the
BSF out post nos. 1 & 2., on the following day, 9 October 2011. Mr. Khalil Sk's wife, who had received the notice
of his arrest earlier in the morning, was on her way to the BSF out post when
she learned about her husband’s death. Mr. Khalil Sk’s body was taken to the hospital,
where he was declared dead. The body was later transferred to Raninagar Police
Station, where the police registered an unnatural death case no. 20/2011, before
being taken, on the next day, to Lalbagh Sub-Divisional Hospital for a post
mortem examination. 
According to eye witnesses,
including Mr. Khalil Sk’s wife, Mr. Khalil Sk’s body bore signs of multiple
injuries consistent with torture. His skull was allegedly broken at several
places, his left eye was badly injured, two fingers of his left arm were
completely smashed and numerous marks of beating were visible all over his
body.
On 17 October 2011, Mr. Khalil Sk’s wife lodged
a complaint with the Raninagar Police Station for alleged homicide against the
BSF soldiers of BSF Out-Post nos 1 & 2 under Char Mourasi BSF Camp. The complaint
was received but not registered by the duty officer of the police station, Mr.
Sirajul Salehin. After Mr. Khalil Sk's wife waited for about four hours at the
police station, she was reportedly taken by Masum’s district human rights monitor
to the office of the District Superintendent of Police at Baharampur, where the
complaint was eventually received, but no reference number was provided. To
date, no effective
investigation has reportedly been initiated into the circumstances of the death
of Mr. Khalil Sk. 
The International Secretariat
of OMCT is gravely concerned about the aforementioned allegations and therefore
calls on the competent
authorities to ensure that an investigation is carried out promptly, effectively, thoroughly, independently and impartially, in
accordance with international human rights standards, inter alia, with the UN Principle on the Effective Prevention and
Investigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions, the result of
which must be made public, in orderto
bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal
and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law.
OMCT recalls that the
authorities have to fulfil their obligations under the Indian Constitution[1]
and under international human rights law to protect the right to life and the right not to be
subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment and to bringing to justice those responsible for violating this
right.
OMCT has indeed documented many
cases of indiscriminate killings and torture committed by the BSF over the
years in West Bengal,
against both Indian and Bangladeshi nationals, in an alleged effort to contain
illegal cross-border activities. Although in some cases complaints were
lodged, no effective investigations have been carried out and no perpetrators
were brought to justice. 
Action requested
Please write to the
authorities in India/ West Bengal urging them to:
 
i.                    
Guarantee, in all
circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Khalil Sk's family;
ii.                  
Carry out a
prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into
the aforementioned events, in accordance with international human rights standards, the result of
which must be made public, in orderto
bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal
and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;
iii.        Ensure
that an effective remedy as well as the right to full redress, including
compensation, is granted to Mr. Khalil Sk's
family; 
iv.        Guarantee
the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country
in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
Ø     
Mr. Shri Manmohan Singh, Prime Minister of India, Prime Minister’s Office, Room number 152, South Block, New Delhi, Fax:
+ 91 11 2301 6857;
Ø      Mr. P. Chidambaram,
Union Minister of Home Affairs,
Ministry of Home Affairs, 104-107 North Block, New Delhi 110 001 India, Fax: +91 11 2309 2979; 
Ø      Hon'ble Mr. Justice S.H. Kapadia, Chief Justice
of India, Supreme Court, Tilak Marg, New Delhi
-1, Fax: +91 11 233 83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.in; 
Ø     
Justice K. G. Balakrishnan, Chairperson,
National Human Rights Commission of India, Faridkot House, Copernicus
Marg, New Delhi 110 001, Fax: +91 11 2334 0016, Email: chairnhrc@nic.in; 
Ø     
Mr. Satyabrata Pal, Member, National
Human Rights Commission of India, Faridkot House, Copernicus Marg, New
Delhi 110 001, Fax: +91 11 2334 0016, Email: satyabrata49@hotmail.com;
Ø     
Jusice N. C. Sil,
Acting Chairman, West Bengal Human Rights
Commission,
Bhabani Bhaban, Alipur, Kolkata -27. Fax +91 33 24799633, Email: wbhrc@cal3.vsnl.net.in; 
Ø      M. K. Narayanan, Governor, West Bengal, Raj Bhaban, Kolkata
– 62, Phone: +91
33-2200 1641, Fax: +91 33 – 2200 2444 / 2200 1649, secy-gov-wb@nic.in; 
Ø     
Miss Mamata Banerjee, Chief
Minister, Government of West Bengal, Writers’ Buildings, BBD Bagh, Kolkata
– 1, Fax - +91 33 22145480, Email - cm@wb.gov.in, sechome@wb.gov.in; 
Ø      Permanent
Mission
of India
to the United Nations (Geneva),Rue
du Valais 9, 1202 Geneva, Tel: +41 22 906 86 86, Fax: +41 22 906 86 96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of India in your respective
country.
*******
Geneva, 20 October 2011
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.



[1] Article 21 of the Indian Constitution states that “No person shall be deprived of
his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law”. 