Algeria:  Algeria: arbitrary arrest and detention of three people
October 31, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Algeria / 2001 / OctoberAlgeria: Algeria: arbitrary arrest and detention of three peopleDZA 311001 Arbitrary arrests/Incommunicado detention  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT INTERVENTION in the following situation in Algeria.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Centre de conseils et d'appuis pour les jeunes en matière de droits de l'homme (Youth Centre for Advice and Support on Human Rights) (CODAP), member of the OMCT network, of the arbitrary arrest of three people on 8, 10 and 20 October 2001 respectively in the Jardin de Dellys area near the army barracks - formerly SONIPEC - in the Commune of Dellys, in Wilaya de Boumerdes in Algeria.  According to information on hand, at 2 p.m. on Saturday 20 October 2001 five armed men in civilian clothes arrived at the Allalou family home in a blue Peugeot 505 asking for H'mida Allalou:  According to H'mida's family, he has been underground (in the maquis) for the last 5 years.  As these men did not find whom they were looking for, they arrested his brother, Farid Allalou, a 32 year old shopkeeper.  Since then, his family has not had any information as to where he is being held.  Previously, at 2 p.m. on 9 October 2001, five men had come in the same car and taken the father of the Allalou family away.  He was driven to army barracks and questioned about his children; later, at about 6 p.m. he was dropped at Alger railway station so that he could return home.  According to information on hand, at 1.30 a.m. on 8 October 2001 four men in army uniform arrived at the Maouchi family home in a blue Peugeot 505 and arrested Lhouari Maouchi, a 21 year old student.  Two days later, on 10 October 2001, the same men, but this time in civilian clothes, driving a Mercedes car, arrested Lhouari's 39 year old brother Mr. Saâd Maouchi, who is unemployed.  According to information received, these men explained to the Maouchi family that the arrests were necessitated by an investigation currently underway.  They also stated that according to the law, the family could contact the chief prosecutor of the Republic after the statutory twelve days of police custody.  When the family went to the offices of the chief prosecutor to inquire about the two brothers, he informed them that he knew nothing about these arrests.  The International Secretariat is deeply concerned by these arbitrary arrests and incommunicado detention and fears that these people may be subjected to ill treatment.  OMCT notes, furthermore, that the inability of the chief prosecutor's services to provide information to the families of disappeared persons is clear evidence of the lack of transparency of the Algerian legal administration.  Action requested  We request you kindly to write to the authorities in the Republic of Algeria, urging them :  1.	to locate Messrs. Farid Allalou, Lhouari Maouchi and Saâd Maouchi, to take all the necessary measures to safeguard their physical and psychological integrity and to guarantee them access to a lawyer and to visits by their families: 2.	to order their immediate release in the absence of valid accusations or, if appropriate, to bring them before an impartial and competent court of law, while guaranteeing their procedural rights at all times; 3.	to promote respect for human rights and fundamental liberties throughout the country, in compliance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	H.E. Mr. Bouteflika, President of the Republic.  Fax : (+213 21) 69 15 95 	e-mail : president@el-mouradia.dz  ·	H.E. Mr. Yazid Zerhouni, Minister of the Interior, Ministère de l'Intérieur, 18 Rue Docteur Saâdane, Alger.  Fax : (+213 21) 60 52 10  ·	H.E. Mr. Ahmed Ouyahia, Minister of Justice, Ministère de la Justice, 8 Place Bir-Hakem El-Biar, Alger.  Fax : (+213 21) 92 12 43 ou 92 30 61  Please also write to the diplomatic representatives of Algeria in your own country.  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken, citing the code of this appeal in your reply.  Geneva, 31 October 2001 