China:  Sentencing and ongoing arbitrary detention of prominent Buddhist leader, Mr. Wu Zeheng,as well as some of his followers
November 25, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / China / 2015 / NovemberChina: Sentencing and ongoing arbitrary detention of prominent Buddhist leader, Mr. Wu Zeheng,as well as some of his followers

URGENT APPEAL - THE
OBSERVATORY

New information
CHN 001 / 0814 / OBS 071.2
Arbitrary detention / Judicial harassment
People’s Republic of China
November 25, 2015
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention on the following situation in
the People’s Republic of China (PRC).
New
information:
The Observatory has been informed by reliable
sources about the sentencing and ongoing arbitrary detention of prominent
Buddhist leader, Mr. Wu Zeheng,as well as some of his followers. Mr.
Wu Zeheng is also known as Buddhist Zen Master Shi Xingwu, and is committed to
promoting greater respect for human rights and the rule of law and to fighting
against corruption. He has been detained with some of his followers since July
29, 2014 (see background information).
According to the information
received, on October 30, 2015, the Zhuhai City Intermediate People’s Court
sentenced Mr. Wu Zeheng to life imprisonment on charges related to his
religious group’s alleged activities, namely “organizing or using an illegal cult to
undermine implementation of the law”, “rape”, “fraud”, and “production and sale
of harmful food,” resulting in prison terms of 12 years, life, 14 years, and 6
years respectively. The Court also fined him 7.15 million yuan (approx.
1,045,000 Euros) in connection with the last two charges. 
The court also sentenced three of
Mr. Wu’s disciples, namely Ms. Meng Yue, Ms. Yuan Ming, and Mr. Zhao Weiping, to
three to four years’ imprisonment for the alleged offenses of “fraud” and
“organizing or using an illegal cult to undermine implementation of the law”.
Another individual, surnamed “Liu”, was convicted of “production and sale
of harmful food”, but received no criminal sentence.
The Observatory condemns the
judicial harassment against Mr. Wu Zeheng and his followers, as it seems merely
aimed at sanctioning Mr. Wu Zeheng's peaceful human rights activities, and
calls upon the authorities of the People’s Republic of China to overturn the
life sentence issued against him. 
The Observatory also urges the Chinese
authorities to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Wu and all his followers, and to immediately and
unconditionally release them and drop all charges against them. 
Background
information[1]:
Mr. Wu Zeheng served
an 11-year prison term from 1999 to 2010, based on spurious accusations of
economic crimes that followed a letter he sent in 1998 to the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of China and State Council, and in 1999 to the Chinese
President Jing Zemin and then Prime Minister Zhu Rongji, denouncing human
rights violations and calling for reform. During this time in prison, Mr. Wu
Zeheng faced repeated and extensive torture. Since his release on February 28,
2010, Mr. Wu Zeheng has been subjected to close surveillance by the Chinese
authorities as well as various forms of persecution (stalking, beatings,
insults, theft, travel restrictions, etc.).
On May 9, 2011, in
front of several witnesses, Mr. Wu Zeheng was beaten, threatened and forcibly
arrested by officers belonging to the Zhuhai police. At 9:00 pm that day, eight
policemen forcefully entered Mr. Wu's residence and seized him, his younger
sister and two students and searched all rooms, without presenting any search
warrant or any other legal documentation authorising their action.
Double-handcuffed, Mr. Wu was forcefully taken to the police station for
questioning. Along the way and during the interrogation, which went on until
10:00 am the following morning, the police beat him and yelled offensive
comments. He was told that he would not be bothered again only if he remained
in his hometown. He was also warned not to participate in Buddhist ceremonies
or to have his students visit him. He was held in detention for 24 hours before
being released without charges and without being provided any legal document
explaining or justifying the police actions against him.
According to the
police interrogators, Mr. Wu and his followers were detained on May 9, 2011 on
suspicion of intending to organise an illegal assembly. Despite complaints
filed on May 16, 2011 with the Xiangzhou Public Security Bureau (PSB) of Zhuhai
city, these acts of harassment have remained unpunished. According to a written
notice in response to the complaints, bearing the seal of the Xiangzhou PSB of
Zhuhai and dated July 4, 2011, the Bureau stated no illegal enforcement of the
law had occurred during the police intervention of May 9, 2011. 
On July 29, 2014, Mr. Wu Zeheng and some of his followers (including children) were again
taken into custody, after the police staged a coordinated raid on a number of
businesses and living compounds run by his group, Hua Zang Dharma. They
were arrested for “using cult activities to undermine law enforcement, to
defraud, to commit sexual assaults, and to engage in other criminal activities.” The Public Security office of Guangdong
Province was the investigative authority in this case while the Public Security
Bureau of Zhuhai was involved in the enforcement and interrogation. No search
warrant nor any official documents were presented to justify the raid and the
arrests. In the first 24 hours of his detention, Mr.
Wu was kept awake for 16 hours straight, denied all food and water, and
consecutively questioned by four different groups of police officers.
On September 5, 2014, the police authority charged all
the detainees with “organising and making use of evil cults to destroy the
implementation of law.” 
On October 28, 2014, the evidence gathered by the
Police Authority regarding this case was sent to the Zhuhai Procuratorate,
which on December 19, 2014, determined that there was insufficient evidence and
ordered the Police Authority to re-investigate the case. 
On January 19, 2015, new evidence for this case was
sent to the Zhuhai Procuratorate; on March 4, 2015, the case was returned by
the Procuratorate to the Zhuhai Police Authority for the second time because of
insufficient evidence. The Police Authority was again ordered to re-investigate
the case.
In addition, Mr. Wu’s followers are being persecuted both judicially[2]
and through a slander campaign. On August 5 and 15, 2014, three major
newspapers - the Southern Metropolis Daily, the Yangcheng Evening
News, and the Guangzhou Daily - launched a defamatory campaign
against Mr. Wu Zeheng, accusing him of raping his female students and
laundering money through the Hua Zang Dharma discipline, which is considered a
fraud by the Chinese authorities. From August 29, 2014 onwards, several other
defamatory articles were published in the official media including by CCTV. The
Zhuhai Intermediate People's Court refused to investigate the allegations
presented by Mr. Wu’s lawyers on October 19, 2014 in relation to this slander
campaign. These false reports recklessly slandered Mr. Wu Zeheng and the Hua
Zang Dharma discipline, seriously damaging his reputation as a human rights
defender, the reputation of his followers under arrest, as well as that of all
members of the Hua Zang Dharma discipline. 
The Observatory was also informed by Mr. Wu’s lawyer,
Mr. Lin Qilei, who went to visit his client on February 15, 2015, that the food
provided to Mr. Wu was not sufficient, that he was forced to undertake extra
duties, and that he was deprived of communication with his family. Also, during
the visit no mobile phone nor video or audio recording devices were allowed,
nor were Mr. Wu and his lawyer allowed to pass written notes to each other,
which violates regulations concerning prisoner visits and communication between
prisoners and their lawyers. After denouncing these restrictions to the Zhuhai
Procuratorate, Mr. Lin Qilei was informed that, despite the variety of
regulations throughout China concerning the matter of visits with prisoners, at
the very least audio recordings should be allowed.
Actions requested:
Please write to the authorities in the People’s
Republic of China, urging them to:
i.                    
Release
Mr. Wu Zeheng and his followers immediately and unconditionally since their
detention is arbitrary, and seems only aimed at sanctioning Mr. Wu's human
rights activities.
ii.                  
Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
of Mr. Wu Zeheng and his followers, as well as
of all human rights defenders in the People’s
Republic of China;
iii.                 
Put an
end to the harassment - including at the judicial level - against Mr. Wu
Zeheng, his followers, as well as against all human rights defenders in the
People’s Republic of China;
iv.                
Conform
with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by
the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially its
Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”, and Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall
take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent
authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against
any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination,
pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her
legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
v.                  
Ensure in
all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by the People’s Republic of China.
Addresses: 
Mr. LI Keqiang,
Prime Minister of the People’s Republic of China: Guojia Zongli, The State
Council General Office, 2 Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017, People’s
Republic of China; Fax: +86 10 65961109 (c/o Ministry of Foreign Affairs)Ms. WU Aiying,
Minister of Justice of the People’s Republic of China: Buzhang Sifabu, 10
Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People’s Republic of
China; Fax: +86 10 6529 2345; Email: minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cnMr. WANG Yi,
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China: Buzhang
Waijiaobu, 2 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Beijingshi 100701, People’s Republic of
China; Fax: +86 10 6588 2594; Email: ipc@fmprc.gov.cnMr. GUO
Shengkun, Minister of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China:
Buzhang, Gong’anbu, 14 Dongchang’anjie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100741,
People’s Republic of China; Fax: +86 10 63099216 Permanent
Mission of the People’s Republic of China to the United Nations: Chemin de
Surville 11, P.O. Box 85, 1213 Petit-Lancy 2, Geneva, Switzerland; Fax:
+41 22 7937014; E-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int;Embassy
of the People’s Republic of China in Brussels: Avenue de Tervuren, 1150
Woluwe Saint-Pierre, Belgium; Tel: +32-2-7711497, +32-2-7711495; Fax: +32-2-7792895;
Email: chinaemb_be@mfa.gov.cn
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy
of the People’s Republic of China in your respective country.
***
Geneva-Paris, November 25, 2015
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.
The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated
to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete
support in their time of need.
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
· E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
· Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
· Tel
and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 



[1]               For more information,
see Observatory Open Letter of December 16, 2011 as well as Urgent Appeal of
August 27, 2014.


[2]               Among those detained
on July 29, 2014, only those holding
foreign passports were released without charges, while many of the others were
given heavy sentences. Some of them were condemned without a court hearing and
without their families being informed. Moreover, although Chinese law allows
lawyers to access and copy the case files of their clients during the
prosecution period, the Procuratorate has been obstructing the work of the
lawyers of the detained followers. Furthermore, all
the information about the events of July 29 written by the lawyers involved in
the case and published on the Internet, has been suppressed, allegedly by the
authorities. 