Bangladesh:  Immediately implement bail order for Odhikar Director
November 29, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2013 / NovemberBangladesh: Immediately implement bail order for Odhikar Director
Geneva-Paris, November 29, 2013. The World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human
Rights (FIDH), within the framework of the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, call for the immediate release of Mr. ASM Nasiruddin
Elan, the Director of human rights non-governmental
organisation Odhikar. 
 
On November 24, 2013, the High Court Division of the Supreme Court of
Bangladesh ordered six-months ad interim bail to ASM Nasiruddin Elan. At the hearing, Deputy Attorney General Abdullah
Al Mamun opposed Mr. Elan’s bail by stating he was a flight risk and that if
released, he would destroy evidence. On October 8, 2013, Additional Attorney
General Momtazuddin Fakir had used the same arguments to oppose the bail of Mr.
Adilur Rahman Khan, Secretary of Odhikar and a member of OMCT General
Assembly, who was detained from August 11 to October 11, 2013 in relation to the
same case.
 
Yet, Mr. Nasiruddin Elan remains detained in Kashimpur Jail-2, although the bail order was signed by the Judges of the High Court, the bail bond
was sent for confirmation to the Metropolitan Sessions Judge and then to Dhaka
Central Jail to be forwarded to Kashimpur Jail (as Kashimpur is under the
authority of the former). On November 29, 2013, Deputy Jailor Amanullah of
Kashimpur Jail-2 informed Odhikar that although they have received the Court’s
order dated November 24 granting Mr. Elan’s bail, they also have received
“specific instruction” from the Attorney General’s office not to release him
now. Therefore Mr. Elan will now have to wait until December 1 before jail
officials receive further instructions from the Attorney General’s office about
his release, which is a clear violation of fundamental rights and the flouting
of the Court’s order.
 
“Delaying release is nothing else but
an additional harassment of the members of Odhikar and qualifies as arbitrary
detention for which the State of Bangladesh should be liable”, noted Gerald Staberock, OMCT
Secretary General. “This tactic of protracting bail is also a serious
assault on the judiciary that casts further doubts on the authorities
willingness to comply with basic rule of law standards in this case”, he
added.
 
Moreover, although the Cyber Crimes Tribunal was to finally frame charges
against Messrs. Nasiruddin Elan and Adilur Rahman Khan on November 28, 2013, Mr. Elan was not brought to
the Tribunal from Kashimpur jail due to the country-wide blockade. 
 
The Observatory recalls that any form of arbitrary
detention under Article 9 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights must be compensated by the State. It is also concerned about continuous
failures to ensure due process, as the defence has yet to be given certified
copies of all documents submitted to the Tribunal from the prosecution - even
though the required applications and fees had been paid. The Judge stated again
that he would pass an order about this matter, and fixed the next date of
appearance for the hearing of the charges on December 18, 2013.
 
The Observatory recalls that Messrs. ASM Nasiruddin Elan and Adilur
Rahman Khan are being prosecuted in a case filed
by the Government under Section 57 of the Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) Act, 2006 (amended in 2009) and under
Sections 505 and 505A of the Penal Code, in relation to a fact-finding report
issued by Odhikar on the killing of 61 people during an operation carried out
on May 5-6, 2013 by security forces against Hefazat-e Islam activists in Dhaka.
If found
guilty, they might face up to 14 years in jail or Tk 10,000,000 (about 93,660 €) fine under the
ICT Act and seven years’ jail term under the Penal Code.
 
“The prosecution against Messrs.
Nasiruddin Elan and Adilur Rahman Khan is arbitrary since it only aims at sanctioning and preventing their activities as human rights defenders. Accordingly, the
authorities of Bangladesh should immediately put an end to it and to any
harassment against Odhikar and its members”, concluded Karim
Lahidji, FIDH President.
 
For more
information, please contact:
·   OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39
·   FIDH: Audrey Couprie/Arthur Manet: +33 1 43 55 25 18 