Tunisia:  Open letter to Tunisians: No to Terrorism, yes to human rights
April 28, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / Tunisia / 2016 / AprilTunisia: Open letter to Tunisians: No to Terrorism, yes to human rights
Take action now: share, like and retweet or watch our videos:Campaign video: https://youtu.be/ecU_AWnDngETestimonies:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bi5_H8tC1yA https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P4-kMC3VwIQ https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f467UgaDV60 Twitter account, "Campagne Tunisie": https://twitter.com/TunisieDHFacebook page: https://www.facebook.com/TunisieDH/Letter to Tunisians: No to Terrorism, Yes to Human Rights
Tunisians,
in shock and horror over the recent terrorist attacks, have demanded strong and
determined measures to eliminate terrorism. They understandably identify
terrorism as a threat to both the Tunisian people and the nation.
However,
some provisions of the newly-adopted counterterrorism law raise the risk of
serious human rights violations. Human Rights defenders have raised the alarm
that the Tunisian authorities are treading a dangerous path in the name of
striking back against terrorists.
Those
warnings have led to accusations that those who advocate human rights are “soft
on” terrorists. Amid the rhetoric that has pervaded Tunisian public discourse
lately, a core message has emerged: Human rights cannot be allowed to hinder
necessary counterterrorism efforts.
We, the undersigned
Tunisian and international human rights groups, acknowledge the importance of
this debate and address this letter to you, people of Tunisia, to address your
legitimate concerns and clarify any misunderstandings. 
First, we
strongly affirm that terrorism is an awful crime that can never be excused or
justified. It poses a major threat to human rights, beginning with the most
fundamental of rights, the right to life. Combating terrorism is a crucial
government responsibility. The government needs to take all possible steps to
ensure that those responsible for terrorism are identified and promptly brought
to justice, and, if fairly convicted, face appropriately serious punishment. 
However,
the government also has a duty to respect human rights. These obligations are
NOT mutually exclusive. Nor should one be met at the expense of the other. This
is why: 
1. Terrorists aim to destroy social peace;
governments should not facilitate that for them.
Terrorist
attacks are intended to make people live in a constant and corrosive state of
fearful unpredictability. Yet, similar conditions are created when a
government’s police and security forces, protected by unjust laws, can abuse
anyone with impunity. A government should not trample on people’s rights in its
effort to fight terrorism. Such an approach effectively hands victory to the
terrorists.  
2. Sacrificing human rights does not defeat
terrorism; it nurtures it.
Social
inequality and the absence of adequate political representation and economic
opportunities for youth are among the root causes of terrorism. But another
root cause is the denial of justice and accountability, which sometimes can
drive people to take desperate measures, even to commit or justify acts of
terrorism. Curtailing rights to counter terrorism, therefore, is not just
legally and morally wrong; it is also strategically unwise and
counterproductive. Widening injustice creates a breeding ground for terrorism.
A state system that allows abuses to go unpunished only offers more excuses to
disenfranchised youths to resort to violence. This tragic spiral of frustration
and resentment should be broken, not nurtured. 
3. Abusive laws aimed against terrorists
actually threaten everybody.
Many
people suppose that unjust counterterrorism laws are the price to pay to
protect national security and ensure public safety. But that is a slippery
slope. States that are unbound by laws consistent with human rights will always
be tempted to use their powers arbitrarily. Unchecked counterterrorism efforts
almost certainly results in dreadful abuse of honest, innocent citizens—either
by mistake or intentionally, perhaps for political reasons. Capable, effective
security forces are necessary to maintain stability and civil peace. But they
should never be given a blank check. This is how police states are born, and
Tunisians just got rid of one that lasted 23 years. Unjust laws lead inexorably
to unjust regimes. Tunisia should beware falling into that pit again. 
4. Upholding human rights is not being
“soft” on terrorism.
Respecting
Human Rights does not mean being weak, or lenient toward terrorism suspects. It
just means granting them the same fair trial conditions, including the presumption
of innocence, to which we are all entitled. Guaranteeing fairness and
delivering true justice is by no means a sign of state weakness —on the
contrary. More important, judicial fairness doesn’t impede strong law
enforcement against those who threaten lives and security. Protecting
everyone’s rights means providing justice to everyone. This means guaranteeing
the safety of the innocent, as much as punishing the guilty. 
5. Torturing terrorism suspects does not help
counterterrorism efforts.
Torture
is one practice that all states have agreed to ban absolutely, on the basis
that it is never right, whatever its context or purposes. Nevertheless, some
condone it, assuming that brutalizing suspects yields information that is
useful to counterterrorism. Yet a wealth of evidence from around the world – from
both people who were tortured and from those who tortured people – shows that
brutalizing suspects rarely yields truthful and reliable information or aids
counterterrorism efforts.
Abused
prisoners are most likely to tell their captors whatever they want to hear to
make the torture stop. Such forced confessions result in false leads. Even if
scattered with pieces of truthful information, the false information leads to
more abusive, unwarranted arrests and interrogations, in an endless spiral of
injustice and inefficiency. Ultimately, security services end up wasting
precious time and resources that would be far better utilized conducting lawful
and productive counterterrorism efforts.
6.
Abuse discourages informants and feeds terrorist propaganda.
Torture
has another devastating side effect. It alienates
the very people most likely to possess information that could prevent terrorist
acts: relatives, neighbors, acquaintances of those engaged in terrorism. An
effective counterterrorism effort is one that gives people confidence to inform
the authorities about suspicious activity.  But if people fear that
reporting their suspicions could lead to individuals being tortured, including
perhaps themselves as possible accomplices, they will keep quiet. A
rights-respecting approach is the best way to encourage informants with useful
information to come forward.
Furthermore, when a state sanctions
torture and other serious abuse, it reinforces the terrorists’ victimhood, ads
also the sense that they are only striking back at an irredeemably unjust
system. It is more likely to feed the terrorists’ sense of purpose, assist
their propaganda, and boost their recruitment. 

---
Violating
rights to prevent further rights violations is neither a wise nor an efficient
approach. Nor does it lead to any form of perennial stability. The best and
most effective antidote to terrorism is democratic institutions and adherence
to the rule of law. And this should of course be accompanied by measures that
address economic and social problems and give the population – particularly
youth – a sense of engagement and of hope for the future. 
“Work, liberty,
national dignity” – these were your demands, Tunisian people, when you valiantly
took to the streets five years ago to bring down decades of dictatorship,
corruption and injustice. Today, terrorism truly menaces your young democracy.
It is imperative to confront, combat, and overcome terrorism. But how the fight
is conducted does matter. The means do not justify the ends. On the
contrary, bad means ultimately taint even the most legitimate of ends.  No one should allow human rights abuses to spoil
the ideals of the Tunisian revolution. 
List of signatory organizations
Tunisian groups
1.    
Union Générale Tunisienne du
Travail (Tunisian General Labour Union)
2.    
Ligue Tunisienne des Droits de l’Homme (Tunisian Human
Rights League)
3.    
Ordre National des Avocats de Tunisie (National Bar
Association)
4.    
Forum Tunisien pour les Droits Economiques et
Sociaux (Tunisian Forum for Economic and Social Rights)
5.    
Syndicat National des Journalistes Tunisiens (Union of
Tunisian Journalists)
6.    
Association des Magistrats Tunisiens (Association of
Tunisian Judges)
7.    
Organisation Contre la Torture en Tunisie (Tunisian
Organization Against Torture)
8.    
Association Tunisienne des Femmes
Démocrates (Tunisian Association of Democratic Women)
9.    
Al Bawsala 
10. Association
citoyenneté et Libertés (Association Citizenship and Freedoms)
11. Association
Horizons El Kef Pour Le Développement Intégral
12. Association Nawaat
13. Association Scientifique pour les Études sur la
Population, la Migration et la Santé (ASPOMIS)
14. Association Tunisienne de Défense des Libertés
Individuelles
15. Fondation Belaid Contre la Violence (Belaid’s Foundation
Against Violence)
16. Fondation Mohamed Brahmi
17. Fondation Mohamed Belmufti pour la justice et les
libertés
18. CeTuMA (Centre de Tunis pour la Migration et l'Asile)
19. Coalition pour les Femmes de Tunisie 
20. Comité pour le
Respect des Libertés et des Droits de l’Homme en Tunisie (Committee for respect
of Freedoms and Human Rights in Tunisia)
21. Coordination Nationale Indépendante pour la Justice
Transitionnelle
22. Fédération
Tunisienne pour une Citoyenneté des deux Rives 
23. Free Sight
Association 
24. Groupe
Tawhida Ben Cheikh
25. Irtikaa
26. L’Organisation
Tunisienne de la Justice Sociale et de la Solidarité 
27. Labo Démocratique (Democratic Labo)
28. L'association Amal
pour l'environnement Metlaoui Bassin Minier (Amal Association for the
Environment in the Mining Basin)
29. L'Association des
Femmes Tunisiennes pour la Recherche sur le Développement (Association of
Tunisian Women for research on development) 
30. L'Association
Femme et Citoyenneté (Association Women and Citizenship)
31. L'Association
Tunisienne de Défense du Droit à la Santé (Tunisian Association for the Defense
of the Right to Health)
32. Ligue des
Electrices Tunisiennes 
33. Mourakiboun
(Observers)
34. Observatoire National sur l’Indépendance de la
magistrature (National Observatory on Independence of Justice)
35. Réseau Doustourna
36. Thala Solidaire
37. UTOPIA Tunisie 
38. Zanoobya
International
groups
39. Réseau Euro-Méditerranéen des Droits humains (Euro-Mediterranean Human
Rights Network)
40. Organisation Mondiale Contre la
Torture (International Organisation Against torture)
41. Fédération Internationale des Droits de
l’Homme (International Human Rights Federation)
42. Human Rights Watch 
43. Oxfam
44. Article 19
45. International Alert
46. The Carter Center 