Cameroon:  Homophobic Climate Maintained by State Inaction: Support and Protection Needed for the Defenders of the Rights of LGBTI People
February  3, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cameroon / 2014 / FebruaryCameroon: Homophobic Climate Maintained by State Inaction: Support and Protection Needed for the Defenders of the Rights of LGBTI People

Preliminary conclusions
of a fact-finding mission
on the situation of
LGBTI people's rights defenders
 
Paris–Geneva, February 3, 2014. The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
FIDH and OMCT, outlines the preliminary conclusions
of a mission conducted in Cameroon from January 7 to 16, 2014 on the situation
of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) people's rights
defenders.
 
The testimonies and analyses gathered during
the mission reflected an environment marked by overall insecurity and
intimidation against health rights and LGBTI rights defenders, in a context of
criminalisation of homosexuality. The mission delegates were able to meet
notably with representatives of human rights organisations, LGBTI people,
journalists, lawyers, sexual health workers, church representatives, national
authorities and institutions as well as diplomatic missions.
 
To date, Cameroon is the country with the highest number of persons
being prosecuted, sentenced and imprisoned for “consensual sexual relations
with a person of the same sex” (Article 347bis of the Penal Code). Despite a
moratorium promised by President Biya on arrests carried out in application of
Article 347bis of the Penal Code, at least 15 people (men and women) are now
being held in Cameroonian prisons because of their real or suspected sexual
orientation. 
 
Between 2012 and 2013, many defenders have faced targeted acts of
harassment because of their support for LGBTI persons. According to the mission
delegates, “the Cameroonian authorities are showing no perceptible signs of
willingness to stop these persecutions. According to the information received,
none of the persons responsible for blackmail or extortion has ever been
arrested or troubled, and the complaints filed by the defenders have all been
ignored. This is especially alarming since law enforcement officers may have
been involved in several of these cases”.
 
On the very issue of the investigation into the death of Eric Ohena
Lembembe, Executive Director of the Cameroonian Foundation for AIDS (CAMFAIDS)
and journalist who actively defended LGBTI rights, the mission noted that the
only procedural act carried out by the investigating judge up to now was a “summons to witness … to be accused and
questioned about charges of aggravated theft”, notified by a bailiff on
October 17, 2013 to six persons who were close to the victim. “The
inertia of the Cameroonian authorities encourages a climate of impunity for the
perpetrators of crimes and persecution against LGBTI people, and contributes to
the stigmatisation and discrimination of these people and of the defenders of
their rights”, the mission delegates stated.
 
In addition to the repression described above, institutions responsible
for guaranteeing respect for people’s rights suffer from lack of independence
and resources. In particular, the National Commission on Human Rights and
Freedoms (Commission nationale des droits de l'Homme et des
libertés – CNDHL) does not have the
authority nor the independence needed to protect Cameroonian citizens,
especially the most vulnerable ones, including LGBTI people. Furthermore, the
legal aid system is ineffective. The result is that, in fact, the most
vulnerable people do not have access to legal services nor to a fair trial.
This situation is all the more serious for people suspected of homosexuality as
only three or four lawyers are willing to represent them before the police and
judicial authorities, which in turn increases the stigmatisation of those
lawyers.  
 
“In this context, LGBTI rights defenders are working in an atmosphere ridden with
fear and insecurity due to the lack of sustainable institutional support for identity-based organisations.
Insecurity pushes the organisations to “hide” themselves behind activities to
combat AIDS in favour of populations most at risk, which are covered in the
National HIV/AIDS Strategic Plan”,
the mission deplored.
 
The Observatory will publish in the coming months a comprehensive
mission report on the situation of LGBTI rights defenders in Cameroon with
specific recommendations to the national authorities, non-State actors,
international organisations, diplomatic representations and to national,
regional and international human rights protection mechanisms. 