Maldives:  End the targeted harassment and intimidation of human rights defender Shahindha Ismail
April  5, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Maldives / 2018 / AprilMaldives: End the targeted harassment and intimidation of human rights defender Shahindha Ismail
Bangkok, 5 April 2018 The Asian Forum for Human Rights and
Development (FORUM-ASIA), the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders (an FIDH-OMCT partnership), Front Line Defenders and Amnesty
International call on the Government of the Maldives to immediately end the targeted
harassment and intimidation of prominent human rights defender and Executive Director
of the Maldivian Democracy Network (MDN), Shahindha Ismail.

The police have accused Shahindha Ismail of attempting to
‘disrupt the religious unity and create religious discord in the Maldives’
through Twitter. She has already been summoned twice and, on 2 April 2018,
police questioned her for allegedly criticising Islam ‘with the intention to
cause disregard for Islam’ under Section 617 (a) 1 and 2 of the Penal Code,
which prescribes up to four months and 24 days of imprisonment for first time
offenders. Shahindha Ismail has categorically denied the allegation.

These false allegations and the investigation against
Shahindha Ismail appears to be only an attempt by the Government to obstruct
her legitimate work as a human rights defender.

The allegations against Shahindha Ismail stem from a tweet
she posted on 21 December 2017 in response to a statement by President Abdulla
Yameen that said he would not allow any religion other than Islam. Shahindha
Ismail tweeted in response that ’Religions
other than Islam exist in this world because Allah allowed for it. No other
religion would exist otherwise, would it?’

Police launched an investigation against Shahindha Ismail
after the pro-government news website Vaguthu Online posted a series of articles on
28 December 2017 about her tweet. The online articles accused her of
‘indirectly calling to allow other religions in the Maldives’ and blasphemy,
branded her an apostate, and demanded repentance. On the same day, the Ministry
of Islamic Affairs issued a public statement that condemned anti-Islamic speech
believed to be in reference to Shahindha Ismail’s tweet. These reports spurred
an onslaught of threats, including death threats, against Shahindha Ismail on
social media.

The authorities must instead launch a prompt, independent
and impartial investigation into the online abuse and threats against Shahindha
Ismail that she has received because of her legitimate human rights work and
the peaceful exercise of her right to freedom of expression. 

We are concerned that in an environment where online threats
against human rights defenders, particular against those who are seen deemed to
be espousing secular views, have had dire consequences in the recent past, the authorities
have ignored the serious threats against Shahindha Ismail.

In April 2017, human rights defender and blogger, Yameen
Rasheed was killed after the police and other authorities failed to respond to
reports of threats against him. Similarly, journalist and human rights
defender, Ahmed Rilwan Abdulla, was abducted and remains missing since August
2014 after a number of reports of threats against him had been ignored by the authorities.

These false allegations against Shahindha Ismail will have a
chilling effect on an already restrictive environment for freedom of expression
and human rights defenders in the Maldives. This investigation will only serve
to embolden those who peddle hate and threats against human rights defenders.
The Government of the Maldives has an obligation
under the Constitution and international treaties to which it is a state party
to guarantee the right to freedom of expression and other fundamental freedoms.
We urgently call on the Government of the
Maldives to close this investigation, and end all forms of harassment against
Shahindha Ismail. The Government must ensure a safe and enabling environment
for human rights defenders to carry out their legitimate work without fear of reprisals.

ENDS 