China:  Joint Press Release: Massive crackdown of human rights lawyers continues
July 16, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / China / 2015 / JulyChina: Joint Press Release: Massive crackdown of human rights lawyers continuesChina_2015.07.16_PR_English1 page / 200 KB Geneva-Paris-Hong-Kong, July 16, 2015 – The Chinese
authorities must end the widespread crackdown against lawyers, and immediately
and unconditionally release the lawyers and human rights defenders throughout
China who have been arrested or disappeared, said the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights defenders along with FIDH member organisations,
China Labour Bulletin and Human Rights in China. 
Beginning on July 9, 2015, with the disappearance of
prominent human rights lawyer Ms. Wang Yu and her husband Bao Longjun
and their son, Chinese authorities have systematically rounded up and detained
at least 177 lawyers and rights defenders. The unprecedented crackdown has targeted
a committed group of rights defense lawyers working throughout the country,
including key members of the Fengrui law firm. Mr. Zhou Shifeng,
Director of Fengrui, and 14 other lawyers including Mses. Li Shuyun and Wang
Fang, and Messrs. Wang Quanzhang, Huang Liqun, Sui Muqing,
Xie Yang and Liu Sixin remain detained or missing as of this
writing. Furthermore, Frengrui's premises were searched on the afternoon of
July 10, 2015, with three computers being seized. 
Other human rights defenders and civil society actors
have also been targeted through summons, detention or interrogation in at least
22 provinces and municipalities across China directly under the control of the
Central Government, with 17 individuals still detained or missing. For more
information on the ongoing crackdown, see Human Rights In China's resource page
here.
Our organisations recall that the targeting of human rights lawyers
is an alarming illustration of the deteriorating situation of human rights in
China. When those who speak out for the rights of others are systematically
targeted for carrying out legitimate and peaceful activities, the future of
rule of law in China is grim. 
While no formal charges have yet been filed against
those who were targeted over the past few days, some have reportedly been
detained on suspicion of “illegally organising paid protests,” “inciting
subversion of State power,” and “fabricating rumours on the Internet to sway
court decisions.” Furthermore, State-run media have characterised the targeted
lawyers as “a major criminal gang,” accusing “radical human rights lawyers” of
“stirring up several serious public opinion issues” and “disrupt[ing] the legal
process.”
Our organisations call on the Chinese authorities to immediately disclose the
whereabouts of the detainees, ensure their right to access to a lawyer and
respect their rights including those stipulated in the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders and the UN Basic Principles on the Role of
Lawyers.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders (OBS) was created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The objective of this
programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy to situations of repression
against human rights defenders.
 
For more
information, please contact :
FIDH: Lucie Kroening (French /
     English / German / Arabic) - Tel: +33 6 48 05 91 57 (Paris) ; Arthur Manet
     (French / English / Spanish) - Tel: +33 6 72 28 42 94 (Paris)OMCT: Miguel Martín
     Zumalacárregui (French / English / Spanish) - Tel: +41 22 809 49 24 (Geneva/Brussels)HRIC: Mi Ling Tsui (English /
     Mandarin / Cantonese) - +1 212.268.9074 (New York)CLB: Geoffrey Crothall –
     (English) +852 2780 2187 (Hong
     Kong); Han Dongfang (Mandarin) +852 9109 0092 (Hong Kong) 