Mexico:  On the anniversary of the publication of the Law for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders and Journalists, International Organisations call on Mexico to effectively implement the National Protection Mechanism
June 26, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Mexico / 2013 / JuneMexico: On the anniversary of the publication of the Law for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders and Journalists, International Organisations call on Mexico to effectively implement the National Protection Mechanism

Geneva-Paris-Brussels-Dublin, June 26, 2013. The World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH), in the framework of their joint programme, the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, Peace Brigades International (PBI) and Front Line Defenders urge for the effective
implementation of the National Protection Mechanism established by the Law for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders and Journalists, which entered into
force exactly one year ago. 
 
On June 25, 2012, the Law for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders and Journalists entered into force after being unanimously
approved by the Mexican Congress. This Law provides, among other measures, for
the establishment of a National Protection Mechanism. 
 
At the time, the undersigned organisations welcomed
the Law as setting up an institutional framework for the adoption of effective protection measures to
guarantee the right to life, personal integrity, freedom and security of human
rights defenders and journalists who are facing great risk as a result of their
activities in defence of human rights and the exercise of freedom of expression
and journalism, as well as that of their relatives. 
 
The Law for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders and Journalists was
a fundamental
step towards the effective protection of human rights defenders and the strengthening, in turn, of human rights protection and
the rule of law in Mexico. However, one year after the Law entered into force,
the respective regulations and operative protocols have not been fully
implemented despite the fact that they were adopted during the very first
months of existence of the National Protection Mechanism and they reflect
international best practices.
 
Therefore, in order to effectively guarantee
the protection granted by this Law, the undersigned
organisations call on the Federal Government of Mexico to take all the necessary measures to guarantee the
full implementation of the National Mechanism for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders and Journalists, including: 
-     
To
provide the National Protection Mechanism with sufficient qualified staff so it
can be efficient and operational. 
-     
To set
up the Fund Operations Committee that will oversee the financial operation of
the National Protection Mechanism (Comité
de Operación de Fondos). 
-     
To
immediately release the funds aimed to the National Protection Mechanism. 
-     
To
immediately establish the Unit of Prevention, Analysis and Monitoring (Unidad de Prevención, Análisis y Seguimiento)
and appoint its Chair in accordance with the requirements set up by the
Governing Board (Junta de Gobierno). 
-     
To
convene a high-level meeting between the Interior Ministry (Segob), representatives of Mexican civil
society and the Consultative Council (Consejo
Consultivo) of the National Protection Mechanism. 
-     
To
widely disseminate the work of the National Protection Mechanism. 
-     
To
provide the necessary political support for the actions undertaken by the
National Protection Mechanism. 
 
The undersigned organisations
stress that such measures must be handled at all times in a transparent manner
and in consultation with Mexican organisations of civil society, which is a prerequisite
for safeguarding the legitimacy and effectiveness of the Protection Mechanism. 
 
The undersigned organisations
reiterate that, together with the measures adopted to date in the framework of
the Law for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders and Journalists, other
measures must be implemented to effectively combat impunity for human rights
violations. In such cases, State and Federal authorities must ensure that those responsible are brought to justice, in
accordance with national and international human rights law.
 
Press
contact:
·     OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 39
·     FIDH: Arthur Manet / Audrey Couprie:
+ 33 1 43 55 25 18
·     PBI: Rubens Carvalho: +52 (55) 55 14 2855
·     Front Line Defenders: Jim Loughran: +353 1 2123750 