Sri Lanka:  Serious concerns about the fate of Mr. Prageeth Ranjan Bandara Eknaligoda, a journalist working for the LankaeNews Website, one month after he disappeared
February 24, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sri Lanka / 2010 / FebruarySri Lanka: Serious concerns about the fate of Mr. Prageeth Ranjan Bandara Eknaligoda, a journalist working for the LankaeNews Website, one month after he disappearedMr. Mahinda Rajapakse
President of the Socialist Democratic Republic of Sri Lanka

Via fax: +94 11 472100/ +94 11 2446657
Email: secretary@presidentsoffice.lk
Geneva, 24 February 2010
Re: Serious concerns about the fate of Mr. Prageeth Ranjan Bandara Eknaligoda, a journalist working for the LankaeNews Website


Your Excellency,
The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), the largest network of NGOs fighting against torture, summary executions, enforced disappearances and all other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in the world, is writing to you to express its serious concern about the fate of Mr. Prageeth Ranjan Bandara Eknaligoda, a journalist working for the LankaeNews Website, who disappeared on 24 January 2010, two days before the presidential election. One month after his disappearance, his whereabouts remain unknown and the police have so far failed to make any inquiry findings public.
According to the information received, on 24 January 2010, Mr. Prageeth Ranjan Bandara Eknaligoda disappeared after he left LankaeNews Website office. The last person who heard from him was reportedly Mr. Gamini Perera, who usually drives him home. However, that day, Mr. Eknaligoda allegedly called him on the phone and told him that he had arranged an alternative transport and that he was at Koswatte.
According to the same information, on 25 January 2010, Mr. Eknaligoda’s wife went along with Mr. Perera to the Homogama police station and tried to register her husband’s disappearance, but the Officer-in-Charge (OIC) informed her that the station was unable to register the complaint without a previous instruction by a higher officer and advised her to register with the Koswatte police. Only after Mr. Eknaligoda’s wife insisted did the officer agree to register the incident. Mr. Eknaligoda’s wife also reportedly lodged a complaint with the Thalangama police station (Koswatte) on the same day.
OMCT is particularly concerned about the disappearance of Mr. Eknaligoda since it occurred shortly after he wrote articles supporting the presidential opposition candidate. OMCT has also been informed that the LankaeNews Website was blocked by the authorities, until after the election, and, on 28 January 2010, its premises were searched at night by a large number of unidentified persons.
OMCT also recalls that Mr. Eknaligoda had previously been victim of an unresolved abduction. On 27 August 2009, he was reportedly taken away, blindfolded, and then chained in a cell by two men who were allegedly responding to instructions from someone referred to as a “higher officer”. Mr. Eknaligoda was reportedly released when the two men were told by the “higher officer” that he wasn’t the right target.
The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned about the safety of Mr. Prageeth Ranjan Bandara Eknaligoda and fears that he may have been subjected to enforced disappearance or extrajudicial killing. OMCT is also very much preoccupied about Mr. Eknaligoda’s health since he has a serious diabetic condition and needs to have two daily insulin injection as well as specific medication following an open heart bypass surgery.
Accordingly, OMCT urges you, Your Excellency, to ensure that the competent authorities carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the disappearance of Mr. Prageeth Ranjan Bandara Eknaligoda, in accordance with international human rights standards, the result of which must be made public, in order to bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law.
We hope that the concerns expressed in this letter will receive the attention they deserve and we would welcome your prompt response on these matters.
Yours sincerely


Eric Sottas
Secretary General
OMCT 