Bahrain:  Press Release: Release of Nabeel Rajab must be followed by other measures to put an end to the crackdown on human rights defenders
July 14, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Bahrain / 2015 / JulyBahrain: Press Release: Release of Nabeel Rajab must be followed by other measures to put an end to the crackdown on human rights defendersBahrain_2015.07.14_PR_EN2 pages / 160 KBParis-Geneva, July 14, 2015.The Observatory for the 
Protection of Human Rights Defenders welcomes the release of Mr. Nabeel 
Rajab but recalls that it is a positive but insufficient step since the Royal Pardon only concerns one of the three set of criminal charges Mr. Rajab has been facing in the last months.Yesterday,
 King of Bahrain Hamad Ben Issa Al-Khalifa ordered through Royal Pardon 
the release of Mr. Nabeel Rajab for health reasons. Mr. Rajab had 
already served three of the six months jail sentence he received in 
appeal on May 14, 2015, for a tweet (under the charges of “Defamation of
 a statutory body” under Article 216 of the Penal Code).However,
 Mr. Rajab still faces up to fifteen years of imprisonment under several
 charges all related to tweets: “”disseminating false rumours in time of
 war” (Article 133 of the Penal Code, entailing up to ten years of 
imprisonment); “disseminating false news causing damage to public 
security” (Article 168, up to two year); “insulting public authorities” 
(Article 216, three year).“These 
pending investigations represent a Damocles sword which the Bahrain 
authorities can use at their will to neutralise the human rights 
activities of Mr. Rajab”, said FIDH President Mr. Karim Lahidji."While
 the release of Mr. Nabeel Rajab is a positive step, he should never 
have been prosecuted nor jailed for his legitimate human rights 
activities. Moreover, the fact that this release is not unconditional 
should be deplored", declared OMCT Secretary General Mr. Gerald Staberock.  In
 addition Mr. Nabeel Rajab's release also takes place in a context of 
systematic repression of human rights defenders, and just a day after 
the new arrest of a prominent political figure who had previously been 
released on Royal Pardon[1],
 thus attesting that the repression of peaceful dissent by human rights 
defenders, political and religious figures will continue to be the norm 
for the Bahraini authorities.The Observatory 
calls on the Bahrain authorities to end its policy of arbitrary arrests 
and release all human rights defenders in jail[2].
 This arbitrariness and the continued harassment they face undermines 
the confidence the international community has in the good faith of the 
authorities in implementing their human rights commitments and in 
undertaking genuine and effective reforms.The 
Observatory calls on the Bahrain authorities to act upon the requests 
made by the international community, including the European Parliament's
 request for “the dropping of charges and immediate and unconditional 
release of all human rights defenders, political activists and other 
individuals detained and charged with alleged violations related to the 
rights of expression, peaceful assembly and association”[3].The
 Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was 
created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The objective of this programme is 
to intervene to prevent or remedy to situations of repression 
against human rights defenders.For more information please contact:·         FIDH: Arthur Manet / Lucie Koening: + 33 1 43 55 25 18·         OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: +41 22 809 49 24[1]                  Ibrahim Sharif, former General Secretary of the National Democratic Action Society (Wa’ad).[2]
                See the Observatory Report, "Imprisonment, torture and 
statelessness: The darkening reality of human rights defenders in 
Bahrain", June 25, 2015, Available here: Report OBS Bahrain_English and Report OBS Bahrain_Arabic.[3]
                See European Parliament Resolution of July 9, 2015 on 
Bahrain, in particular the case of Nabeel Rajab (2015/2758(RSP)). 