Malaysia:  Malaysia: Press Release: Human Rights Defenders under close surveillance
March 27, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Malaysia / 2002 / MarchMalaysia: Malaysia: Press Release: Human Rights Defenders under close surveillanceTHE OBSERVATORY for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders	  PRESS RELEASE  Malaysia: Human Rights Defenders under close surveillance   Paris, Geneva, Kuala Lumpur, 27th March 2002   A mission of investigation of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of FIDH and OMCT, visited Malaysia from March 7th to March 22nd to gather information on the situation of groups and individuals involved in the promotion and the defence of human rights in the country.  The delegation held meetings with a wide range of relevant actors: human rights organisations and other NGOs, journalists, trade unionists, lawyers, academics, politicians, students, families of Internal Security Act (ISA)  detainees, the Bar Council, the National Human Rights Commission  (Suhakam)... The delegation also met with the Attorney General of Malaysia.  The Observatory shares the concern of many observers as tension and pressure on human rights defenders are likely to grow in the coming weeks. Indeed, the anniversary of the detentions of pro reform leaders under the Internal  Security Act will fall on April 10 2002, and the anniversary of Anwar  Ibrahim's conviction on April 14 2000 ("black 14").  To mark the first anniversary of their detention, six ISA detainees have expressed their  intention to go on a hunger strike on April 10 2002.  The delegation found that the authorities have elaborated a sophisticated  system to silence human rights defenders and to stifle attempts to promote  and defend human rights. Freedom of expression, freedom of assembly and  freedom of association are heavily restricted. The tight control directly or  indirectly exerted over the media is a key element in hindering independent  human rights advocacy. The mandatory police permit for holding public  gatherings of more than five people under the Police Act is selectively used  as a tool to curtail the activities of the opposition parties as well as of  civil society. Non governmental organisations face obstacles when  registering: the discretionary power of the Registrar of Societies and the  delay in processing the applications have compelled many of them to register  as Companies - this situation weakens the structuring of civil society and  exposes the organisations to sanctions by the authorities.    The delegation concluded that the government resorts to a two-fold strategy:  1.	The purposeful use of a wide array of extremely stringent legislation -  first and foremost the Internal Security Act - to arrest targeted  individuals perceived as being too critical of the government, be it because of their activities in political parties or their involvement in organising civil society. The cases of Hishamuddin Rais, filmmaker and newspaper columnist, and Tian Chua, former director of Suaram (a leading human rights organisation) and vice-president of the National Justice Party, both arrested  under the ISA on April 10 2001, are prime examples thereof. It further appears that the authorities have instrumentalised the post September 11th “fight against terrorism” to consolidate their efforts to  curtail the political opposition through the ISA. 2.	The inculcation of a culture of fear through various means of pressure,  intimidation and coercion. Systematic interrogations and surveillance, economic pressure (cancellation of contracts with government agencies,  professional sanctions...), and negative exposure in the media are among  classic instruments used by the authorities. This has been made possible by the domination (consolidated over the years) of the ruling coalition led by  UMNO (United Malays National Organisation) over practically all aspects of Malaysian institutional, economic, political and judicial life. Such a  culture of fear has led to widespread self-censorship.   In effect, the government aims at discouraging and discrediting independent human rights advocacy, thus leaving more room for human rights violations. The lack of effective remedies and strong concerns about the  independence of the judiciary aggravate the vulnerability of such groups and  individuals.   The Observatory calls on the Malaysian authorities to abolish the Internal Security Act, which allows for indefinite detention without trial, and to ratify the United Nations International Covenant on Civil and Political  Rights (ICCPR), the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural  Rights (ICESCR), and the Convention Against Torture.   The Observatory further calls on the Malaysian authorities to guarantee the freedom of action of human rights defenders in accordance with the declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in December 1998.  A full report with recommendations will be released in the next months  For further information please contact:  OMCT: Laurence Cuny : 00 41 22 809 49 39 FIDH: Juliane Falloux: 00 33 1 43 55 20 11 In Kuala Lumpur Anne-Christine Habbard Handphone :  (006) 016 25 44 362 