Indonesia:  Reform of the Law on Associations must create an enabling environment, not increase restrictions
July 11, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Indonesia / 2013 / JulyIndonesia: Reform of the Law on Associations must create an enabling environment, not increase restrictions

Paris-Geneva, July 11, 2013. As the United Nations (UN) Human Rights Committee is examining today the
report of Indonesia on the state of civil and political rights in the country, the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, and the Commission
for the Disappearances and Victims of Violence (KontraS) call upon the President of Indonesia not
to sign into law the “Ormas” Bill on Civil Organisations. The Bill, which risks
to undermine significantly the capacities of civil society to work in
Indonesia, must be revised to conform to international human rights law and
standards.
 
On
July 2, 2013, the House of Representatives adopted the highly restrictive Bill
on Civil Organisations (“Ormas Bill”), a bill sponsored by the ruling party, which
will restrict freedom of association, freedom of expression, freedom of
assembly and freedom of thought, conscience and religion. 
 
This
Bill blatantly infringes upon international human rights commitments binding
Indonesia. Six years ahead, in 2007, the UN Special Representative of the
Secretary General on the Situation of Human Rights Defenders had already
pointed out to a number of restrictive provisions in the law currently in force
(Law 8/195) and called upon the authorities to repeal it and adopt a legal
framework in consonance with human rights standards. At the time, the Ministry
of Home Affairs had indicated that the Parliament would initiate a reform as a
matter of priority.
 
Yet,
the recently adopted bill far from fulfilling its promises only risks to
increase the interference of government into the activities of NGOs, more
particularly human rights NGOs. Instead of being based on the principle of the
right to freedom of association, the Bill seems to contend that NGOs shall be
responsible for the achievement of Indonesia's national goals, based on the
“Pancasila” ideology[1].
This reference, which pervades the whole Bill, risks to subject the creation
and operation of NGOs to a large range of subjective interpretations by both
central and local government bodies. Authorities may use this reference to
target all legitimate activities carried out by human rights NGOs, including
the expression of criticisms aimed at improving respect of human rights
standards.
 
In
addition, Article 5 of the Bill provides for a limited list of objectives that
an NGO may serve. While this list does not include human rights, it refers to
vague or discriminatory purposes such as “maintaining the value of religion and
belief in Almighty God”, “preserving and maintaining the norms, values, morals,
ethics and culture”, “establishing, maintaining and strengthening the unity of
the nation” and “realising the goals of the State”.
 
Finally,
the Bill places supplementary restrictions upon the creation and operation of
foreign NGOs, which must obtain a permit from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and are prohibited from conducting activities likely to disrupt “stability and
oneness” as well as “practical political activities” or fundraising or
activities likely to “disrupt diplomatic ties”.
 
Central
and local government authorities would be allowed to use a wide array of vague
or subjective grounds to scrutinise the operation and funding of independent
NGOs. They can go as far as suspending or closing down NGOs deemed in
contravention, without any prior judicial review.
 
“The
right to freedom of association is a fundamental right, which plays a vital
role in the promotion and protection of all human rights and the promotion of
the rule of law and democratic principles. Any infringement to this right
undermines the respect of all other human rights. While some restrictions may
be imposed, freedom should remain the rule and restrictions the exception.
Restrictions provided for in the Bill clearly impair the essence of the right”, declared Karim Lahidji, FIDH President. 
 
“Our
organisations are concerned that the current bill was drafted in an attempt to
stifle civil society organisations, in particular human rights NGOs. Contrary
to recommendations made by local, regional and international NGOs as well as
several UN mechanisms, the provisions of the current draft law contravene
international standards and among others would give the Minister of Home
Affairs the power to unduly interfere with the internal management and
activities of NGOs, including human rights NGOs, on the pretext of compliance
with vague concepts”, added Gerald
Staberock, OMCT Secretary General.
 
“The
Bills fails to address critical issues pointed out by the Special
Representative during her visit in 2007 and, instead of creating an enabling
environment for NGOs, adds more restrictive conditions for the set up and
operation of NGOs. The most repressive and problematic provisions still remain.
If signed into law, the bill will represent a further setback to the enjoyment
of human rights in the country, and would blatantly violate most basic
international human rights standards on the right to freedom of association of
human rights defenders”, said Haris Azhar,
KontraS Coordinator. 
 
Our
organisations denounce the provisions of this bill, which blatantly violates
international and regional human rights standards relating to freedom of
association, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR) ratified by Indonesia, as well as the 1998 United Nations Declaration
on Human Rights Defenders, and in particular Article 5 (on the right “to form,
join and participate in non-governmental organisations, associations or
groups" and “to communicate with non-governmental or intergovernmental
organizations”) and Article 13 (on the right “to solicit, receive and utilize
resources for the express purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms through peaceful means”). 
 
Our
organisations therefore strongly urge the President of Indonesia not to sign
the Bill into law and review it so as to conform with international human
rights law, and in particular with the best practices defined by the United
Nations Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Assembly and Association in his first
report to the UN Human Rights Council.
 
***
 
Analytical
overview of most problematic provisions of the Bill
 
Problematic
provisions include the following:
 
Criteria
for registration contain ideological and / or subjective elements
The
Bill requires NGOs to uphold the “Pancasila” ideology. This vague criterion
could potentially allow the authorities to target all legitimate activities
carried out by human rights NGOs, including the expression of criticisms aimed
at improving respect of human rights standards.
 
Limits
on categories of activities based on ideological and / or subjective elements
The
Bill subjects NGOs to vague prohibitions and bans. Local NGOs are also required
to maintain “religious values”. The Bill provides for prohibitions and bans
already covered by provisions of the Indonesian Criminal Code (KUHP), thus
implying that NGOs are more likely to commit such violations. Therefore, NGOs
are particularly vulnerable to criminal charges such as blasphemy against
established religions, promoting separatism, disruption of public order,
violation of Pancasila or advocating violence. 
 
Risk
of increased interference by the executive based on ideological and / or
subjective elements
The
Bill places authority on NGO affairs in the Directorate General of National
Unity and Politics of the Ministry of Home Affairs to control the activities of
NGOs and their sources of funding. A political body is thus responsible for
assessing whether NGOs' activities or sources of funding NGO are in line of the
Pancasila ideology. This provision grants excessive discretionary power to the
Executive to interfere into the activities and funding of NGOs.
 
The
Bill also requires NGOs to use accounts in national banks (Article 37). This
requirement is discriminatory as it only applies to NGOs and no other private
or public actors.
 
Finally,
the Bill gives central and local government officials discretionary powers to
suspend and dissolve civil society organisations, without prior judicial review
(Article 60 et al.).
 
A
compulsory registration system
The
Bill requires all NGOs to register under the Directorate General of National Unity and
Politics of the Ministry of Home Affairs and
the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights. The fact that the Ministry of Home
Affairs has a history of seeking to control civil society sends a clear message
to the NGO community that the authorities want to strengthen their grip on
civil society. 
The
Bill also provides for a burdensome registration process.
 
Additional
restrictions on foreign NGOs or foreign funders
The
Bill significantly curtails the activities of foreign associations, which must
obtain a permit from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to operate (Article 44),
and whose activities must be in accordance with “Pancasila”, should not disrupt
the “stability and oneness” of Indonesia, and should not carry out “practical
political activities” or fundraising or activities “which disrupt diplomatic
ties” (Article 52). In addition, foreign nationals wishing to (co)found an NGO
must have lived in Indonesia for at least seven consecutive years and place
Rp10 billion (over US$1 million) of their personal wealth in the association
(Article 47).



[1] Pancasila is the official philosophical foundation of the Indonesian
state. Pancasila comprises five principles held to be inseparable and
interrelated: belief in the one and only God, just and civilized humanity, the
unity of Indonesia, democracy guided by the inner wisdom in the unanimity
arising out of deliberations amongst representatives, social justice for all of
the people of Indonesia. 