Israel:  Concern about six administrative detainees currently on hunger strike and subjected to punitive measures
February 26, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2014 / FebruaryIsrael: Concern about six administrative detainees currently on hunger strike and subjected to punitive measures
Case
ISR 260214
Administrative detention/ Hunger strike/ Punitive
measures/ Serious health concerns
The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) requests
your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Israel and the
Occupied Palestinian Territory.
Brief description of the situation
The International Secretariat of the OMCT has been informed by Addameer, a
member of the OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the critical health conditions of
Mr. Akram Fasisi, Mr. Waheed Abu Maria, Mr. Mo’ammar Banat, Mr.
Ameer Shammas, Mr. Husam Omar and Mr. Musa Soufian, six
administrative detainees currently on hunger strike in protest of Israel’s policy of
indefinite detention without charge or trial. OMCT recalls that the widespread
practice of imprisoning Palestinians under administrative detention orders is
illegal according to international law.
According to the information received, Mr. Akram Fasisi (31 years old
from Ithna, Hebron) has been on administrative detention since 16 November
2012, and his administrative detention order has been renewed three consecutive
times. He started his first hunger strike on 29 September 2013 for 59 days
before ending it due to a deteriorating health. He announced a new hunger
strike on 9 January 2014, and is currently held in Kablan civil hospital. 
Mr. Waheed Abu
Maria (46 years old, from BeitUmmar, Hebron) has been on administrative
detention since 30 October 2012, and his administrative detention order has
been renewed five consecutive times. He is currently being held in Tel Aviv at
Willenson Hospital. He started his hunger strike in protest of this policy on 9
January 2014.
Mr. Mo’ammar Banat
(26 years old, from Arroub Refugee Camp) has been on administrative detention
since 13 August 2013, and his administrative detention order has been renewed
twice. He is currently detained in Kablan civil hospital. He started his hunger
strike on 9 January 2014 in protest of administrative detention.
Mr. Ameer Shammas
(22 years old, from Ras Al Jora, Hebron) has been on administrative detention
since 2 September 2013. He was initially in Megiddo Prison before being
transferred to Ramleh Prison Clinic and then to Assaf Harove. He is currently being
held in Tel Hashomer civil hospital. He started his hunger strike on 11 January
2014.
Mr. Husam Omar (30
years old from Tulkarem) was arrested on 26 February 2002 and sentenced to
thirty years. He was re-interrogated for 50 days on 17 June 2013 and presented
with a new list of charges. On 30 September 2013, he was transferred to an
isolation cell in Megiddo Prison. He is currently being held at Ramleh Prison
Clinic. He started his hunger strike on 25 January 2014 in protest of his
indefinite period of isolation. 
Mr. Musa Soufian (from
Tulkarem) was arrested in 2002 and initially sentenced to life. He was also
re-interrogated in late 2013 with Mr. Husam Omar and issued a new list of
charges. He started his hunger strike on 25 January 2014 in protest of his
imprisonment in isolation beginning on 30 September 2013. He is currently detained
in Ramleh Prison Clinic.
According to the
same information received, Addameer was able to visit Mr. Mo’ammar Banat and Mr.
Akram Fasisi mid February. Mr. Banat and Mr. Fasisi reportedly explained that
on the first day of their announced hunger strike, they were immediately
transferred to cold and humid isolation cells. Despite the cold weather, all of
Mr. Banat and Mr. Fasisi’s belongings and blankets were confiscated. They were
denied the right to shower for the first ten days of their strikes. They
described that their isolation cells were 2x2 meters in size, only contained a
small pit in the floor for them to relieve themselves, and were monitored by
Israeli Prison Service (IPS) cameras 24-hours a day. Mr. Banat and Mr. Fasisi
also told Addameer that as punitive measures, they were denied recreational
hours in the yard, family visits, the ability to purchase basic supplies and
goods from the prison canteen, and were subjected to frequent night raids and
searches.
Mr. Banat and Mr. Fasisi
reported that they were transferred to Sha’are Zedek Medical Center on the
fifteenth day of their strikes along with Mr. Waheed Abu Maria and Mr. Ameer
Shammas. Afterwards the four of them were taken to Ramleh Prison Clinic.
Although the hunger strikers have reported to suffer from critical health
conditions, including fatigue, exhaustion, severe headaches, joint pain, chest
pain, and shortness of breath, all of them consistently have refused medical treatment.
They described that the IPS officers shackled the prisoners’ hands and feet to
the hospital beds, and that all four of them were on various occasions
transferred to solitary confinement cells in Ramleh Prison Clinic as punishment
for their continued hunger strike.
According to the
same information received, Mr. Ameer Shamaas is in a serious condition due to
the hunger strike. He is currently held at Tel-Hashomer Medical Centre, where
he receives liquids. However, he has refused any examination. Mr. Shamaas is reportedly
shackled to his bed and watched by guards 24 hours. Furthermore, the IPS has
not allowed his mother to visit him despite a visitation permit that she
received from the army. 
The OMCT has also
been informed that Mr. Husam Omar and Mr. Musa Soufian, two other hunger
strikers in Ramleh Prison Clinic, have also reported being subjected to
punitive measures following their hunger strike, including denial of family
visits, isolation in a 2x3 meter cell, confiscation of property, and daily
searches between midnight and 3:00 am. In addition, Mr. Soufian has allegedly developed
an unidentified lump on his neck during his imprisonment.
The OMCT has also
been informed about the case of Mr. Abdul Majeed Khdeirat (45 years old from
Tubas), who was arrested on 15 May 2013 at a checkpoint near Nablus, after
being released in the 2011 prisoner exchange deal. He reportedly went on hunger
strike for 95 days in 2013 in protest of his re-arrest. On 15 January 2014, he
started another hunger strike in protest of his re-arrest and the delay in his
trial, but he stopped on 18 February 2014, after his lawyers negotiated with
the Israeli Occupation Forces (IOF) for his release in 18 months’ time. 
According to the same information received, the IPS, Ministry of Public
Security and the General Security Services (GSS or Shabak) have recommended to
the Knesset (the Israeli Parliament) to consider a new legislation that would
allow for the force-feeding of prisoners on hunger strike. The draft of the law has reportedly not
yet been submitted to the Parliament. The new legislation been widely
condemned by human rights and health organizations, including the Physicians
for Human Rights-Israel (PHR) and The Legal Centre for Arab Minority Rights in
Israel (Adalah). 
The OMCT
expresses its deep concern about the situation of the six aforementioned hunger strikers and urges the competent authorities to take immediate
measures in order to ensure that they are treated humanely under all
circumstances and that they are allowed access to lawyers, independent
physicians and their family members. OMCT is concerned that detainees carrying
out a hunger strike are getting punished, including by being held in solitary
confinement, and urges the authorities to put an end to these practices. 
Finally, OMCT expresses
concern for the procedure under which their administrative detention has been
ordered, fearing that it does not meet international human rights standards, including their right not to be arbitrarily detained
as well as their absolute right at all times not to be subjected to any cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment. 
Background information
Israel has been
holding hundreds of persons from the Occupied Palestinian Territory (OPT) in administrative detention. In the occupied Palestinian West Bank, the Israeli army
carries out administrative detention on the basis of Military Order 1651, which
empowers military commanders to detain an individual for up to six months if
they have “reasonable grounds to presume that the security of the area or
public security require the detention.” On or just before the expiry date, the
detention order is also frequently renewed and this process can be continued
indefinitely.
Administrative detention
deprives detainees of basic safeguards, including the right to challenge the
evidence on which the detention is based, warrants are not required, and the
detainee may be held in incommunicado detention for an extended period, subject
to renewal.
The
United Nations Committee Against Torture has expressed its concern
that administrative detention does not conform with article 16 of the
Convention[1].
This type of indefinite administrative detention, following manifestly unfair
proceedings, can amount to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. 
Action requested
Please write to the
authorities in Israel urging them to:
i.              
Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and
psychological integrity of Mr. Akram Fasisi, Mr. Waheed
Abu Maria, Mr. Mo’ammar Banat, Mr. Ameer Shammas, Mr. Husam Omar, Mr. Musa
Soufian and Mr. Abdul Majeed Khdeirat; 
ii.             
Cease the practice of solitary confinement and any
other punitive measures; 
iii.           
Guarantee their unconditional access to independent
physicians;
iv.           
Guarantee unconditional access to all members of their
families, and guarantee that the family members are provided with all
information concerning their medical condition;
v.             
Order their immediate release in the absence of valid
legal charges that are consistent with international legal standards, or, if such
charges exist, bring them promptly before an impartial, independent and
competent tribunal that will ensure due process at all times; 
vi.           
Put an end to administrative detention; 
vii.          
Carry out a prompt, effective, thorough,
independent and impartial investigation into allegations of
ill-treatment, the result of which must be made public, in order to bring those
responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply
penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;
viii.        
Guarantee that adequate compensation is awarded to them for the violation of their human rights;
ix.           
At all times ensure strict respect for international
human rights and humanitarian law in the exercise of its jurisdiction,
including in connection with military operations in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory.
Addresses
Ø Mr. Benjamin
Netanyahu, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, 3, Kaplan Street, PO Box
187, Kiryat Ben-Gurion, Jerusalem, Israel, Fax:
+972- 2-651 2631, +972-2-566
4838, Email: pm_eng@pmo.gov.il
Ø Brigadier General Danny Efroni, Military Judge
Advocate General, 6 David Elazar Street, Hakirya, Tel Aviv, Israel, Fax:  +972 3 608 0366, +972 3 569
4526, Email: arbel@mail.idf.il, avimn@idf.gov.il
Ø Lieutenant General Aharon Franco, Israel Prison Service Commissioner, Israel
Prison Service, PO Box 81, Ramleh 72100, Israel, Fax: +972 8 919
3800
Ø Mr. Moshe Smilansky
, Deputy Prime Minister of Defense, 37 Kaplan Street, Hakirya, Tel Aviv 61909,
Fax. + 972 3 691
6940 / 696 2757
Ø Maj. Gen. Nitzan
Alon, OC
Central Command Nehemia Base, Central Command, Neveh Yaacov, Jerusalem, Fax:
+97225305741.
Ø Col. Eli Bar On, Legal Advisor of Judea and Samaria, PO Box 5, Beth
El 90631, Fax: +97229977326.
Ø Permanent Mission of
Israel to the United Nations Office and Specialized Institutions in Geneva,
Avenue de la Paix 1-3, 1202 Geneva, Fax:
+41 22 716 05 55, Email: mission-israel@geneva.mfa.gov.il
Please also write
to the embassies of Israel in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 26
February 2014. 
Kindly inform us of
any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in
your reply.



[1] CAT/C/ISR/CO/4, para 17. 