Brazil:  Vale and Belo Monte suspected of spying - The justice system must investigate
February 14, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Brazil / 2014 / FebruaryBrazil: Vale and Belo Monte suspected of spying - The justice system must investigate PORTUGUESE VERSION_Brazil_Vale and Belo Monte suspected of espionage: Justice must investigate1 page / 132 KB

Preliminary conclusions of a fact-finding mission
 
Rio de Janeiro-Paris-Geneva, February 14, 2014.
Today, FIDH and OMCT presented the press with evidence that Vale and the Belo
Monte Consortium have been spying on civil society. The two human rights groups
have called upon the Brazilian judicial authorities to take whatever actions
are necessary to bring these facts to light and take punitive action against
those responsible.
 
In light
of the Brazilian government’s lukewarm reaction to allegations of illegal
espionage by transnational corporations targeting civil society organisations
and movements, FIDH and OMCT, within the framework of the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, conducted an investigation in Brazil from
February 9 to 14, 2014. 
 
The
investigation included interviews with victims, persons working for social
organisations, government and judicial representatives, members of Parliament,
and executives working for Vale, the Belo Monte Consortium, and the National
Development Bank (Banco Nacional do Desenvolvimento - BNDES).
 
The
testimony and documents obtained during the investigation appear to
substantiate claims that Vale and Belo Monte have been engaged in acts of
corruption, that they illegally obtained confidential information and access to
databases, made illegal recordings, were involved in identity theft, and
conducted unfounded employee dismissals. These offences have been perpetrated
with the complicity of State agents. Documents have been unearthed that
substantiate both the bribing of State agents and possible assistance provided
by the Brazilian Intelligence Agency (Agência
Brasileira de Inteligência - ABIN) to Belo Monte, whilst Vale worked with retired ABIN agents. Both
companies are found have targeted persons and NGOs believed to be potential
barriers to the companies’ activities.
 
Delegates
from the fact-finding mission have criticised the State’s lack of progress in
investigating these offences, which were reported to the State Prosecutor in
March 2013. The persons heading the mission also called upon President Dilma
Roussef to be consistent by applying the same standards to this case as those
applied in the Snowden case.
 
The head
of the Observatory mission, Jimena Reyes, Head of FIDH’s Americas Desk, stated
that: “[…] the spying activities conducted by multinational
corporations on social movements in Brazil raises serious questions about human
rights respect by companies. These activities undermine freedom of expression
and the right to protest, which form one of the fundamental pillars of a
democratic state”.
 
Alexandre
Faro, a lawyer and one of the mission delegates explained that: “[…]  the lack of regulations on private
intelligence activities conducted by corporations facilitates the perpetration of abuses against
civil society”. He went on to state that, “the
power held by multi-national corporations calls for a strong legal and judicial
system to act as a counterbalance and stop any further excesses of this nature”.

 
A report
on the fact-finding mission will be published in the coming months. It will
provide a detailed account of the mission’s findings and recommendations, and
will be presented to the Brazilian Government, non-governmental actors,
international organisations, diplomatic representations, and to national,
regional and international human rights protection entities. 