Russian Federation:  The Supreme Court rejects the lawsuit filed against the renowned Historical, Educational, Human Rights and Charitable Society “Memorial” (Society “Memorial”)
February  6, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2015 / FebruaryRussian Federation: The Supreme Court rejects the lawsuit filed against the renowned Historical, Educational, Human Rights and Charitable Society “Memorial” (Society “Memorial”)Russia_PR_20140206_English1 page / 109 KBGeneva-Paris,
February 6, 2015 – The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, an OMCT-FIDH joint programme, welcomes
the decision of the Supreme Court to reject the complaint filed by the Ministry of Justice against Russian
Society “Memorial”.
 
In a decision dated January 28,
2015, Judge Alla Nazarova rejected the complaint filed against the Society
“Memorial” before the Supreme Court on September 24, 2014, by the Ministry of
Justice. The latter requested its closure, alleging “infringements” in its organisational structure, which failed
to have a clear vertical structure, with headquarters and departments in other
region. 
 
Since its foundation in the
final years of the Soviet Union, the network “Memorial”, consisting in a number
of independent NGOs under the same society, is known for exposing Soviet-era
repression, commemorating victims of violations and monitoring the current
human rights situation in the Russian Federation and other post-Soviet
countries.
“The complaint filed by the Justice Ministry, was a clear attempt to harass
and discredit the Society “Memorial”, undermine its tremendous human rights
work and expeditiously lead to its closure. It followed years of harassment, in
the form of defamation through slandering media campaigns and acts of vandalism
targeting the group’s headquarters in Moscow. Russian civil society
organisations are facing a deep and systematic clampdown”, said OMCT
Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
Human Rights Center “Memorial”
is currently fighting a separate battle against an official move to label it a
“foreign agent” under the controversial law targeting NGOs that receive foreign
funding. Moreover, under a newly
proposed piece of legislation, currently debated in the State Duma of the
Russian Federation, foreign organisations would face being labelled as
“undesirable” and closure and local NGOs engaged in cooperation with such
bodies would face criminal charges. 
“While the decision of the Supreme
Court dismissing the complaint against the Society “Memorial” should be
welcomed, we remain deeply concerned by the constant threats to human rights
defenders in the Russian Federation in the context of an ever increasing
repressive legal framework and frequent attacks targeting human rights
defenders”, said FIDH
President Karim Lahidji. 
 
The brutal attackof lawyer Mourad
Magomedov, who works with the Human Rights Centre Memorial in Daghestan, by
five unknown men in Makhachkala, Dagestan which occurred on February 4, 2015,
following numerous threats, is yet another example of the violent repression of
human rights defenders in Russia.
 
For more information, please
contact:
·   
   FIDH: Audrey Couprie/Arthur Manet: + 33 (0) 1 43 55
25 18
·   
   OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: + 41 (0) 22 809 49
24 