China:  China : beginning of Mr. Zheng Enchong's trial
August 29, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / China / 2003 / AugustChina: China : beginning of Mr. Zheng Enchong's trialCHN 001 / 0803 / OBS 041.2 Arbitrary detention / Judicial proceedings China August 29th 2003  The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint  program of FIDH and OMCT, requests your URGENT intervention in the  following situation in China.  New information :  The Observatory has been informed by the non-governmental  organization Human Rights in China (HRIC), that Mr. Zheng Enchong, a  Shanghai lawyer involved in the defence of economic and social rights  of displaced persons, was tried behind closed doors on August 28th,  on charges of "illegally providing state secrets to entities outside  of China".  According to the information received, more than 300 people to whom  Mr. Enchong had been providing legal advice gathered to protest  outside of the court. The court called in some 200 police officers to  control the crowd, and more than 100 protesters were arrested and  taken away in police vehicles. Their circumstances remained unknown  at this time.  According to the same sources, Mr. Enchong's trial began at 1:30 p.m.  at the Shanghai Second Intermediate People's Court in Zhongshan North  Road. Mr. Enchong's wife, Jiang Meili, and other observers were  barred from the court on the grounds that the case involved state  secrets. However,  it is reported that the proceedings were monitored  by representatives of the Shanghai municipal government. Represented  in court by his lawyers, Mr. Enchong pleaded not guilty in the trial,  which lasted for more than five hours and reportedly involved  vigorous legal arguments. The court announced that a verdict would be  rendered in 10 days.  The Observatory is gravely concerned about these massive arrests and  the lack of public access to the proceedings against Mr. Zheng  Enchong. The Observatory recalls that charges for illegally obtaining  state secret can result in heavy prison sentences and consider the  charges against him as arbitrary since the judicial proceeding  clearly aims at preventing him from continuing to defend economic and  social rights and fight against State corruption.  Background information :   The Observatory was informed that Mr. Zheng Enchong was arrested on  June 6 after assisting displaced families in more than 500 cases  relating to Shanghai's urban redevelopment projects. He is currently  detained at the Shanghai Public Security Bureau Detention Center. His  first family visit was allowed on 20th August only. His house was  searched at least twice; during the searches, Public Security police  warned his wife, Mrs Jiang Meili, not to speak to the foreign media  or other parties outside of China.   According to the information received, Mr. Zheng's license was  revoked in 2001 in relation to cases he was handling for people  displaced by urban redevelopment. In spite of Mr. Zheng's deprivation  to practice law and increasing official persecution, he has continued  to provide legal advice to people, even though he could not represent  them in court.  Most recently Mr. Zheng was advising families involved in a lawsuit  alleging corrupt collusion between officials and a wealthy property  developer, Mr. Zhou Zhengyi.   According to the information received, the lawyer of Mr. Zheng  Enchong's met him for the first time for an hour and a half on August  22. Mr. Enchong is reported to have told his lawyer that he was  arrested because he offended powerful local interests through his  involvement in a lawsuit alleging official collusion with a wealthy  property developer, Mr. Zhou Zhengyi, and in reason of his long-term  legal assistance to families displaced in urban redevelopment  schemes.  The Observatory recalls that these acts of reprisal are a flagrant  violation of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, which  states in its article 9.3.c that "In the exercise of human rights and  fundamental freedoms, […], everyone has the right, individually and  in association with others, to offer and provide professionally  qualified assistance in defending human rights and fundamental  freedoms". They also contravene the United Nations Basic principles  of the Role of Lawyers which state that "Governments shall ensure  that lawyers (a) are able to perform all of their professional  functions without intimidation, hindrance, harassment or improper  interference" (article 16).   Action requested :  Please write to the authorities of China urging them to :  i.   Guarantee in all circumstances Mr. Zheng Enchong's physical and  psychological integrity; ii.   Drop the charges against him as they are arbitrary, and release  him immediately;  iii.   Ensure that Mr. Enchong be immediately given back his license; iv.   Put an end to any form of harassment against lawyers and human  rights defenders in China; v.   Conform to the provisions of the Declaration on Humans Rights  Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on  December 9, 1998, in  particular article 1, which states that "everyone has the right,  individually or in association with others, to promote the protection  and realization of human rights and  fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels" and  9.3.c above mentioned; vi.   Conform with the UN Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers; vii.   Conform to the provisions of the Universal Declaration on Human  Rights and international human rights standards;  Addresses :  President Hu Jintao, People's Republic of China, c/o Embassy of the  People's Republic of China; 2300 Connecticut Ave., NW, Washington,  D.C., 20008, USA, Fax: +01  202 588-0032  President Hu Jintao, People's Republic of China; c/o Permanent  Mission of the People's Republic of China, Chemin de Surville 11,  Case postale 85, 1213 Petit-Lancy 2,  Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 7937014, E-mail:  mission.china@ties.itu.int  Ministry of Justice of the People's Republic of China, 10 Chaoyangmen  Nandajie, Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People's Republic of China,  Fax: +86 10 65 292345  Paris - Geneva, 29th August 2003  Kindly inform the Observatory of any action undertaken quoting the  code number of this appeal in your reply.  The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the  protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete  support in their time of need.  To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: Tel and fax: FIDH : +33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11 / 43 55 18 80 Tel and fax  OMCT : (+ 41 22) 809 49 39 / 809 49 29 E-mail : observatoire@iprolink.ch 