Israel:  Incomunicado detention of human rights defender Ameer Makhoul should end immediately
May 12, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2010 / MayIsrael: Incomunicado detention of human rights defender Ameer Makhoul should end immediatelyParis-Geneva, May 12, 2010. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), condemns the extention of the incommunicado detention of Mr. Ameer Makhoul, General Director of Ittijah - the Union of Arab Community-Based Associations, and Chairman of the Popular Committee for the Defence of Political Freedoms in the framework of the High Follow-up Committee for the Arab Citizens of Israel.
On May 12, 2010, the Petah Tikva First Instance Court, located near Tel Aviv, extended Mr. Ameer Makhoul’s arbitrary detention for another six days in order to allow time for more investigation. The next court hearing was set for January 17, 2010.
Following his arrest on May 6, 2010, a judge sitting at the Petah Tikva Interrogation Centre extended Mr. Makhoul’s detention until May 12 and banned him from meeting with his attorney until at least May 8. Today the Petah Tikva Court again rejected the appeal filed by Mr. Makhoul’s lawyers challenging the order banning Mr. Makhoul from meeting with his lawyers. Mr. Makhoul has therefore not had access to his lawyers since his arrest on May 6, 2010. Additionally, Mr. Ameer Makhoul’s wife was forcibly removed from the hearing for “obstructing the proceedings”.
The Observatory expresses its serious concern at the prolonged incommunicado detention without charges of this prominent human rights defender, and calls upon the Israeli authorities to release him immediately and unconditionally since his arrest is arbitrary as it seems to only aim at sanctioning his human rights activities. It highlights that this harassment takes place in a context of an escalating campaign of arbitrary restrictions placed by Israeli authorities against human rights defenders in Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territory.
More generally, the Observatory calls upon the Israeli authorities to conform in all circumstances with the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights as well as international human rights instruments ratified by Israel.
For further information, please contact:


FIDH: Karine Appy / Fabien Maitre : + 33 1 43 55 25 18
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 39 