Mauritania:  Mauritania: torture, ill-treatment and imprisonment of Haratine people
August 22, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Mauritania / 2000 / AugustMauritania: Mauritania: torture, ill-treatment and imprisonment of Haratine peopleCase MRT 220800  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Mauritania.   Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received information from SOS-Esclaves Mauritanie, a member of the OMCT network, regarding impunity for torture and physical and psychological ill-treatment of 52 men and 31 women (see Case MRT 220800.VAW).  13 persons were also detained (although later released on 27th July) during incidents which took place on 17th and 18th June 2000, in Brakna, the administrative centre of Dar El Barka, when forces of order intervened during a peaceful demonstration by the Haratine people (descendants of slaves).  The demonstration protested against the actions of the Governor of the Brakna region who gave his brother a large concession of the lands of the Haratine people for development.    SOS-Esclaves Mauritanie has reported the following cases of torture and ill-treatment and temporary imprisonment: 1.	Kebadi Ould N’Deya : temporarily detained, fracture to right arm, tortured in his home in Zem-Zem and civil papers destroyed. 2.	M’Sekem Ould Thioulèye : hit in prison and attached with chains, still unwell, had 27000UM stolen from him by policemen. 3.	Brahim Ould Mousse : temporarily detained, gravely tortured and in a serious condition. 4.	Mohamed El Moctar Ould Ahmed :tortured in prison and under mental shock : suffers from hallucinations, insomnia and nightmares.  5.	Mohamed Ould Abdallahi :hit and tortured. 6.	Abdallahi Ould Memlouk :  tortured and hit in a cruel manner, had to undergo surgery. 7.	Kebadi Ould Blal : violently tortured in prison. 8.	Moulemnine Mint Memlouk : struck and tortured, forced to eat sand. 9.	Mohamed Ould Boïbou : hit, temporarily imprisoned, home looted and belongings confiscated, lost 13 livestock as food for the police during the days of repression. 10.	El Hassen Ould Boïbou (mentally handicapped) : hit, home looted, lost 20000UM. 11.	Mohamed Ould Sneiba : a businessman, he was tortured and his belongings looted, he lost 1.000.000 UM 12 of his livestock. 12.	N’diaye : lost 220.000UM and the jewellery of his wife. 13.	Barka Ould Boïbou : tortured violently and lost 6 sheep. 14.	Mohamed Ould Abeid Moulana (80 years old ) : temporarily detained, tortured and house looted, lost 3 sheep. 15.	Cheïnoune Ould Dal’gha : house looted, lost 150.000UM and 6 sheep.  16.	Yahya Ould Sneiba : tortured, his home looted and lost 5 sheep. 17.	Alioune Ould Sneiba : tortured, tied up in prison, sand forced in his mouth, house looted and lost 4 sheep. 18.	Cheïbani Ould Sneiba : tortured and stuck until he lost conscience, all his belongings confiscated.  19.	Barka Ould Sneiba : tortured and house looted. 20.	Boubacar Ould Moïma : (85 years old) :tortured, tied up and beaten, house looted. 21.	Cheikh Ould N’deye ; (80 years old) : struck, house looted, lost 9000UM. 22.	Mohamed Ould Yargue : (mentally handicapped): molested, dragged through the sand.  23.	Moïlik Ould M’Bareck : struck and his belongings looted. 24.	Ahmed Abdou Ould Amar : home looted, beaten to a point that he was unable to get up by himself.  He is still unable to walk. 25.	Alioune Ould  Dal’gha : temporarily imprisoned, tortured and his home looted. 26.	Hamdout Ould Oumheine : tied up, tortured and lost 27.000 UM.       27.	Hadou Ould Moïssa : temporarily imprisoned, struck, house looted, lost 12 sheep. 28.	Barka Ould Boïbou : temporarily detained, struck, tortured, suffers from tuberculosis, forced to eat sand. 29.	Jibril Ould Moïssa : temporarily detained, injury to eye, house looted. 30.	Moïssa Ould Barrak : (90 years old ) temporarily detained, struck, chained, house looted. 31.	Alioune Ould Ekhdeïja : violently tortured, temporarily detained, underwent surgical operation as a result of torture. 32.	El Mamy : tortured at length and house looted. 33.	Sidi Ahmed Ould Mouateya : (blind) chained in prison, tortured and injured. 34.	Mohamed Ould Sid’Ahmed : struck and tortured in prison, was temporarily detained. 35.	Mohamed Mahmoud Ould Ebhoum : tortured at length, temporarily imprisoned, still in shock : problems with his sight, hearing and memory loss.  36.	Youba Ould Marsa : (80 years old), temporarily detained, chained, struck and dragged through sand. 37.	El Khalil Ould Marsa : temporarily detained, injured by a bullet. 38.	Kebad Ould  Marsa : temporarily detained, struck, tortured, covered in sand. 39.	Mohamed Abdel Jelil Ould Marsa : tortured, still unwell. 40.	El Moctar Ould Marsa : temporarily detained, tortured, loss of teeth and broken right hand. 41.	Cheikh Ould Marsa : temporarily detained, tortured and dragged through the sand.  42.	Hamenna Ould Marsa (90 years old) :  tortured mentally and physically. 43.	Kebadi Ould Memlouk : temporarily detained, left arm broken and fracture not treated. 44.	Mohamed Ould Memlouk (80 years old) : chained in prison and violently struck. 45.	Brahim Ould Memlouk temporarily detained, physically and psychologically tortured. 46.	El Hadj Ould Mohamd Djibi : tortured, still in shock : delirious, behavioural and memory problems.  47.	Hammena Ould N’deye : tortured until became ill in prison, still in shock. 48.	Boyah Ould N’deye : tortured in a number of ways and obliged to eat sand. 49.	Mohamed Ould Boïbou Ould Hammadi  : tortured, struck and manhandled. 50.	Hadou Ould Abdallahi : exposed to different torture and psychologically ill-treated. 51.	Abdallahi Ould Abdallahi : struck and tortured, still in shock. 52.	Daane Ould Mousse : tortured, struck and head injuries.  SOS-Esclaves Mauritanie also reported that 13 persons were detained, although 6 were released early on.  The remaining 7 were charged with “rebellion against the administration” and kept in prison until 27th July before being provisionally released.  No date has yet been set for their trial.  Those charged are: Mouzdaf Ould Ahmed, Khalil Ould Marsa (see above), Kebad Ould N’Deya (see above), Kebad Ould Marsa (see above), Housseine Ould Moïssa, Cheikh Ould Marsa (see above), Ethmane Ould Mamlouk.  At present there is no one in detention.  The reasons for the protest still stand as the brother of the Governor of the Brakna region is continuing construction on these lands, notably a water reserve.  The community has sent a letter of protest to the prefect of Boghé, Minister of the Interior, and President of the National Assembly and Senate.  They have indicated that the doctors still refuse to examine the injuries caused by police violence and that the Police Commissary, the Prosecutor and examining Magistrate have refused to accept their claims.  Actions requested  Please write to the authorities in Mauritania urging them to:  i.	guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of those subjected to ill-treatment and torture and provide adequate medical treatment for all injuries sustained as well as ensure reparations and compensation to these victims; ii.	order an immediate review of the case of the 7 persons charged with “rebellion against the administration” and drop the charges against them; iii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into all allegations of torture, ill-treatment and looting of property, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; iv.	guarantee the rights of all Haratine peoples and put an end to such incidents of ill-treatment; v.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  President of the Republic, Son Excellence Monsieur le Président Maaouiya Ould Sid 'Ahmed Taya, Président de la République, La Présidence -BP 184, Nouakchott – Mauritania.  Fax : +222 2 52406 or +222 2 59801. Minister of the Interior, Monsieur Dah Ould Abdel Jelil, Ministre de l'Intérieur, des Postes et des Télécommunications BP 195, Nouakchott – Mauritania.  Fax : +222 2 53661 Minister of Justice, Monsieur Mohamed Salem Ould Merzoug, Ministre de la Justice, Ministère de la Justice - BP 350, Nouakchott – Mauritania.  Fax : +222 2 57002 or +222 2 54995 Public Prosecutor, Mohamed Yeslem Ould Jidimou, Procureur de la République, Palais de Justice, Nouakchott - Mauritania Telegrams: Procureur République, Nouakchott, Mauritania. Monsieur El Hassen Ould Maouloud, Wali du Brakna, Aleg, Mauritania. Monsieur le Commissaire Mohamed el Kory Ould Jiyid, Commissaire de Police, Direction Regionale de la Surete du Brakna, Aleg, Mauritania.  Geneva, 22nd August 2000. Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 