Bahrain:  Lawyer mandated by international human rights NGOs denied entry to Bahrain to observe the trial of human rights defender Naji Fateel
November 15, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2013 / NovemberBahrain: Lawyer mandated by international human rights NGOs denied entry to Bahrain to observe the trial of human rights defender Naji FateelBahrain_ARABIC VERSION_Lawyer mandated by international human rights NGOs denied entry to Bahrain to observe the trial of human rights defender Naji Fateel1 page / 2.01 MB

November
15, 2013. While the appeals trial of human right defender Naji Fateel is due to
start on November 18, 2013, a group of human rights NGOs regrets the lack of
cooperation by Bahraini authorities to allow access to the country for a trial
observation. The Arabic Network for Human Rights Information (ANHRI), the Cairo
Institute for Human Rights Studies (CIHRS), Front Line Defenders, the Gulf
Center for Human Rights (GCHR), and the Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (a joint programme of the International Federation for Human
Rights - FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture - OMCT), with support
from IFEX, had mandated a lawyer to observe the trial of the human right
defender, but their request to facilitate entry to the country remains
unanswered several days before the hearing.
 
Naji
Fateel, co-founder of the Bahrain Youth Society
for Human Rights (BYSHR) and a blogger, was sentenced on September 29, 2013 to
15 years in prison for “the establishment of a group for the purpose of
disabling the constitution” under Article 6 of the Terrorism Act. 
 
On
October 8, 2013, a few days after the date of the hearing was made public, IFEX
wrote on behalf of the group to the Ministry of Human Rights and Social
Development to facilitate entry to Bahrain for a lawyer appointed as trial
observer by the group of international organisations. Twelve days later, the
Director in charge of Human Rights replied that “the Ministry is currently
updating its entrance procedures and at this time we will not be able to
facilitate the entry of your representative”. One day later, IFEX requested clarifications
in order to be able to plan future trial observations. Such request remains
unanswered to date. 
 
Our
organisations recall that Naji Fateel was arrested without warrant by security
men in civilian clothes at his home in the village of Bani-Jamra at dawn of May
2, 2013 and held incommunicado for three days, during which time it is reported
that he was severely tortured at the Criminal Investigation Directorate. He was
taken to the Ministry of Interior hospital twice for treatment due to the torture.
 
Previously,
Naji Fateel had been arrested on February 14, 2012 while he was participating
in a peaceful march toward the Pearl Roundabout area, the now restricted centre
of the 2011 protests for rights and democracy. He was also detained between
December 2007 and April 2009, a period during which he was reportedly tortured.
On May 22, 2013, Naji Fateel was sentenced to six months’ imprisonment on
charges of “attending illegal gatherings”.
 
The
co-signed organisations denounce this obstacle to observing the trial, which
manifestly aims to hinder their human rights activities and impedes Naji
Fateel's right to a fair trial. They further call upon the Bahraini authorities
to guarantee in all circumstances the right to freedom of movement to both
local and international human rights defenders in Bahrain as enshrined by
Article 13 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as well as the 1998
United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders.
 
We
collectively and strongly call on the Government of Bahrain to meet its
international obligations and grant immediate and unconditional access to
Bahrain for international human rights observers and journalists.
 
Our
organisations also call upon the Government of Bahrain to put an end to the
judicial harassment against Naji Fateel, and to release him immediately and unconditionally as his detention is
arbitrary since it only aims at sanctioning his human rights activities. 