Iran:  Press Release: Prominent human rights lawyer detained today
June 13, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2018 / JuneIran: Press Release: Prominent human rights lawyer detained today13
June 2018 – The Iranian authorities should immediately release human rights
lawyer Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh and cease all acts of harassment against her, the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH
and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), urged today.
Ms. Nasrin
Sotoudeh, the celebrated human rights lawyer and 2012 laureate of the
European Parliament’s Sakharov Prize, was detained this morning by security
forces in the Iranian capital Tehran and taken to Evin prison. Her husband, who
broke the news, did not provide the reasons for her detention. 
On 5 June 2018, Ms.
Sotoudeh published a post on her Facebook page, in which she reported that she
and her daughter had objected to a car dealer transmitting religious songs from
his shop through loudspeakers to the public. In response, the car dealer
threatened to call the police, according to Ms. Sotoudeh.
Ms. Sotoudeh was
imprisoned in September 2010. Following national and international outcry over
her detention, she was released in 2013 after serving more than three years of
her six-year prison sentence. She has spoken up on different human rights
issues ever since.
She has co-founded a
campaign to abolish the death penalty in Iran and has relentlessly worked to
save from execution some of the persons who had been sentenced to death for
crimes for which they were convicted allegedly committed when they were
children.
In recent times, Ms.
Sotoudeh has defended several women who had been beaten up and arrested after
publicly demonstrating against the compulsory hijab by taking off their
headscarves on the streets. She has also defended a number of several hundred
Sufi dervishes who have been persecuted and prosecuted by the authorities. In
addition, she has spoken against the judiciary’s plans to allow only a selected
list of its trusted lawyers to represent defendants charged with vague
security-related offenses.
After her release in
2013, Ms. Sotoudeh staged a nine-month sit-in protest against the suspension of
her lawyer’s licence outside the capital’s Bar Association premises, and
managed to overturn the three-year ban on practising her legal profession. 
The security and intelligence
agencies and the judiciary are said to have been actively fabricating charges
against Ms. Sotoudeh for some time, including in respect of her protest outside
the Bar Association.
The Observatory
expresses its deepest concern about today's arbitrary arrest of Ms. Nasrin
Sotoudeh, which appears aimed at punishing her for human rights activities. 
For further
information, please contact:
· FIDH : Maryna
Chebat Tel : +33 6 48 05 91 57 e-mail: mchebat@fidh.org / Samuel Hanryon: +33 6
72 28 42 94   e-mail: shanryon@fidh.org
· OMCT : Delphine
Reculeau : +41 22 809 49 39 dr@omct.org
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) The objective of this programme is to
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of  ProtectDefenders.eu
,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society. 