Iran:  Grave concern over health status of human rights defender Hossein Ronaghi Maleki
August 23, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2013 / AugustIran: Grave concern over health status of human rights defender Hossein Ronaghi MalekiGrave concern over health status of human rights defender Hossein Ronaghi Maleki1 page / 117 KB

Paris-Geneva, August 23, 2013. The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), expresses its deep concern about the hunger strike
initiated by Iranian blogger and human rights activist Hossein Ronaghi-Maleki,
whose health status has been deteriorating.
 
On August 9, 2013, Mr. Hossein Ronaghi-Maleki started a
hunger strike to protest the authorities’ ongoing refusal to allow him to
continue his medical treatment out of Evin prison in Tehran. His mother, Ms.
Zolaykha Mousavi, also started a hunger strike on August 20, 2013 to draw
attention to his plight.
 
Mr. Ronaghi-Maleki has been suffering from kidney and heart
problems and bladder inflammation. Since the beginning of his hunger strike, he
has suffered kidney bleeding, blood pressure oscillations and arrhythmic heart
beats. He has already undergone several operations on his kidneys that were
damaged after being repeatedly tortured during his detention, including 13
months in solitary confinement.
 
While on sick leave from prison, Mr. Ronaghi-Maleki was arrested
on August 22, 2012, along with dozens of other activists who had travelled to
East Azerbaijan province to help the victims of an earthquake (see Press
Release of the Observatory dated September 11, 2012). 
 
He has been serving a 15-year prison sentence after being arrested
on December 13, 2010 and convicted on charges of “membership of Iran-Proxy
Internet Group”, “spreading propaganda against the system”, “insulting the
Iranian Supreme Leader and the President”. 
 
The Observatory firmly denounces the appalling disregard for the
health conditions of Mr. Ronaghi-Maleki and urges his immediate transfer to
appropriate medical facilities.
 
The Observatory
also calls upon the authorities to immediately and unconditionally release Mr.
Ronaghi-Maleki and all human rights defenders arbitrarily detained, and to
conform with the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and international human rights
instruments ratified by Iran. 