Myanmar: Release of 15-year-old boy after arbitrary arrest and detention since June 2003
March  2, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / Myanmar (ex-Burma) / 2004 / MarchMyanmar (ex-Burma): Myanmar: Release of 15-year-old boy after arbitrary arrest and detention since June 2003Case MMR 240204.1.CC Follow-up of Case  MMR 240204.CC Release / Child Concern  Geneva, March 2nd, 2004  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information regarding the following situation in Myanmar.  New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Asian Human Rights Commission, a member of the OMCT network, of the release on February 26th 2004, of 15–year-old Maung Chan Thar Kyaw, who had been arbitrarily arrested and detained since June 3rd 2003.   The case has reportedly received vast local publicity. After the release of Urgent Appeals on his behalf on February 23rd and 24th 2004, most major Burmese-language short wave radio stations broadcasted information about the case in their headlines, and Maung Chan Thar Kyaw was released from Chan Aswan Training School on February 26th. His mother thanked everyone involved in his release in an interview, and her husband went to collect their child from custody. The boy is now expected to be back home soon.  Remarks  The International Secretariat of OMCT welcomes the release of Maung Chan Thar Kyaw and wishes to thank the individuals and institutions that intervened on his behalf.   However, the source has reportedly become aware of a number of other persons (adults) who were also arbitrarly arrested and summarily sentenced at the same time as Maung Chan Thar Kyaw. They are currently attempting to obtain further information about the situation of these persons and OMCT will continue to monitor these events. No further action is required on your part for the moment.  Brief reminder of the situation  Maung Chan Thar Kyaw was arrested on June 3rd 2003, and accused of having thrown rocks at police during the attack on the National League for Democracy by government-organised gangs at Depayin, on 30 May 2003. The boy denied these allegations, but had nevertheless been charged and tried on July 7th 2003 by the Monywa Township Court, which found him guilty of obstructing the police and sent him to the Chan Aswan Training School (a detention centre in the Yangon Division). However, OMCT sources believed that the boy's arrest and detention were in fact motivated by the fact that Maung Chan Thar Kyaw witnessed the afore mentioned event on May 30th 2003, which is known as the "Depayin massacre". Numerous civilians and human rights defenders were killed, injured and detained during these events (for further information see: www.article2.org). Additionally, the procedure and sentencing of the young boy violated fundamental domestic and international laws and standards.   Geneva, March 2nd, 2004. 