Sri Lanka:  Sri Lanka: gang-rape and killing of 29 year old mother by soldiers
January  5, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Sri Lanka / 2000 / JanuarySri Lanka: Sri Lanka: gang-rape and killing of 29 year old mother by soldiersSri Lanka: gang-rape and killing of 29 year old mother by soldiers  VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN LKA 050100.VAW  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sri Lanka.  Brief description of the situation:  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by reliable sources of the alleged rape and killing of Sarathambal Saravanbavananthakurukal on the evening of Tuesday 28th December 1999.  According to the information received, Sarathambal Saravanbavananthakurukal, of a Hindu Brahmin family, was forcibly dragged from her home, in Pungudutivu, near Jaffna Peninsula, by Sri Lankan Navy soldiers. They then gang-raped and murdered her. The body of the 29 year-old mother was found the following morning, under leaves, not far from her home near Kannaki Amman Temple.  It is further reported that on 30th December 1999, President Chandrika Kumaratunga has ordered an immediate investigation into these events.  However, according to the neighbours of Sarathambal, the suspects have been transferred from the area perhaps as a preventative measure to avoid action being taken against them.   The International Secretariat expresses its grave concern over the continued reports of torture, including rape, of both women and young girls by Sri Lankan soldiers during the ongoing conflict in Sri Lanka. Previous cases suggest that many rapes often go unpunished and without any remedies. (See case LKA 100899.VAW)   Action requested:  Please write to the authorities of Sri Lanka urging them to :  i.	guarantee an impartial and exhaustive inquiry into the rape and killing of Sarathambal Saravanbavananthakurukal, bring those responsible before a competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and administrative sanctions provided by law;  ii.	guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the family of Sarathambal Saravanbavananthakurukal and ensure them the right to adequate reparation;   iii.	adopt immediate measures to put an end to these acts of torture and killings;   iv.	ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  Her Excellency President Chandrika B. Kumaratunga, Presidential Residence, Colombo 3, Sri Lanka Fax: 94 - 1 - 333 - 703   Mr. Mangala Samaraweera, Minister of Posts, Telecommunications and Media, Old CTO Building Lotus Rd, Colombo 1, Sri Lanka   Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, New Secretariat, Colombo 1, Sri Lanka  Hon. Ambassador, Permanent Mission and Consulate General of Sri Lanka, 56, Rue De Moillebeau,  5th Floor, 1 209, Geneva 19, Switzerland, Fax: (41-22) 734 9084, E-mail: mission.srilanka@itu.ch  Hon. High-Commissioner, The High Commission of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 13 Hyde Park Gardens London W2 2LU United Kingdom Fax: (0171) 262-7970, E-mail: lancom@easynet.co.uk  Geneva, 05 December 2000  Kindly inform the International Secretariat of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 