China:  Arbitrary detention of activists_Allegations of torture and ill-treatment
June  3, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / China / 2011 / JuneChina: Arbitrary detention of activists_Allegations of torture and ill-treatment​Case CHN 030611Arbitrary detention/ Incommunicado detention/ Alleged torture and ill-treatment/ Fear
for the safety
The International Secretariat
of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the People’s Republic of China.
Brief description of the situation
TheInternational Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable
source and Antenna International, a member organisation of OMCT SOS-Torture
Network, about the arbitrary detention of Beijing-based housing rights activist
and former lawyer, Ms. Ni Yulan (47
years old), and her husband Mr. Dong Jiqin, as well as of Wuhan-based political
activist, Mr. Li Tie. OMCT
is gravely concerned about their safety. OMCT has also been informed about the arbitrary detention and subsequent
release of Mr. Wei Quiang,originally from Yan'an City, and Mr. Li Tie’s lawyer, Mr. Jin Guanghong, who
were both allegedly tortured and ill-treated in detention. 
According to the information
received, on 6 April 2011, Ms. Ni Yulan and her husband, Mr. Dong Jiqin, were arrested by Beijing
Police and placed under criminal detention on suspicion of "creating a
disturbance". Officials have reportedly provided no further details about their
detention. However, Ms. Ni Yulan and Mr. Dong Jiqin had been facing harassment,
including surveillance, by police officers for several months before their arrest.
They are both currently being detained in the Xicheng Detention Centre in Beijing,
Haidian District. It is reported that Ms. Ni Yulan was only allowed to meet
with her lawyer on 6 May
2011, in presence of policemen who would not permit
discussion on issues “unrelated to the case”. 
OMCT is gravely
concerned about their safety and physical and psychological integrity. OMCT
recalls that the Beijing police
have previously detained Ms. Ni Yulan on two occasions for an extended period
of time. On 27 September 2002, she
was arrested when petitioning the Beijing National People's Congress Standing
Committee about police beating that she had endured, on 27 April 2002, when
filming the forced demolition of a Beijing home.
The beating left her unable to walk without crutches. She was convicted of
"obstructing official business" and sentenced to one year in prison. Furthermore,
in 2008, Ms. Ni Yulan was accused of having beaten a member of the demolition
crew who knocked down a wall of her home, on 15 April 2008. She was again convicted of
"obstructing official business" and, during her period of detention,
from 2008-2010, she was, among others, allegedly verbally insulted, beaten,
held with people with infectious diseases, denied medical treatment, subjected
to forced labour and placed in solitary confinement[1].
OMCT fears that she may be subjected to similar treatment. 
OMCT is also
gravely concerned about Ms. Ni Yulan’s health condition. Her family was
reportedly not allowed to send medicines she was previously taking. As the
result of repeated torture over the past decade, Ms. Ni Yulan cannot walk and
suffers from several chronic medical issues, including breathing difficulties,
heart problems and digestive troubles. 
OMCT has also been
informed about the arrest, in September 2010, and criminal detention, in
November 2010, for “subversion of State Power” (article 105 of China’s Criminal
Law) of political activist, Mr. Li Tie.
He is currently held in Wuhan City,
Detention Centre number 2, in Wuhan City, Hubei
Province. However, no information is available on his conditions of detention. On
10 March 2011, Mr.
Lie Tie's brother was reportedly denied permission to meet him.
According to the
information received, on 18
April 2011, the first court hearing against Mr. Li
Tie was held before the Intermediate
Court in Wuhan, which
ended without a verdict. Mr. Li Tie was reportedly represented in court by a
lawyer appointed by local public security officials after the lawyer hired by
his parents, Mr. Jin Guanghong, was allegedly detained
incommunicado and tortured shortly before the trial. Mr. Jin Guanghong was later released on 19 April 2011. According to
Article 105 of the Chinese Criminal Law, Mr. Li Tie risks up to ten years of
fixed-tern imprisonment. The prosecutors reportedly argued that evidence of his
“crime” includes writing articles attacking the Government, joining a number of
reactionary discussion sites online, and giving reactionary speeches during
meetings with friends. Mr. Lie Tie has reportedly written extensively in online
articles, including about democracy. 
OMCT has also been
informed about the arrest, on 26
February 2011, and the subsequent release on bail, on 30 April 2011, of
Mr. Wei Qiang, a young political activist.
He was arrested in Beijing and
detained incommunicado in different detention centres in the capital until 21 March 2011, when he
was reportedly transferred to a detention centre in his hometown Yan'an City,
in the Shaanxi Province. The police then issued a detention notice for
“creating a disturbance” as well as a notice stating that Mr. Wei Qiang was to
be sent to two years of Re-education Through Labour (RTL). At the end of March 2011, Mr. Wei Qiang was reportedly returned
to Beijing and
detained in an unknown location for approximately 22 days. There, he was
allegedly placed in an isolated detention cell and chained to a chair most of
the day. Mr. Wei Qiang was then once more detained in an unknown location in
Yan'an, where the head of police allegedly used his knee to knead on Mr. Wei
Qiang’s spine, injuring his waist. Finally, on 30 April 2011, he was released
on bail and he is currently awaiting trial. Mr. Wei Qiang is believed to
have been arrested and detained because, on 20 February 2011, he used his
Twitter account to report on what had happened in front of the Wangfujing
McDonald’s, one of the locations identified in the call for “Jasmine
Revolution” protests[2]. 
The International Secretariat
of OMCT is gravely concerned about the safety of the aforementioned
individuals, and in particular of Ms. Ni Yulan, her
husband Mr. Dong Jiqin and Mr.
Li Tie, who remain detained in unknown conditions and with limited
access to their lawyers and families. OMCT fears that they may be subject to
torture and ill-treatment. 
OMCT recalls that China is a State party
to the UN Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment which prohibits torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment. In line with their obligations under this treaty, it is incumbent on the
Chinese authorities to consider seriously any allegations of torture and
ill-treatment, and to undertake a thorough and impartial investigation in this
regard. OMCT
urges the authorities to conform with China’s international
human rights obligations, commitments that were reaffirmed on the occasion of
its election as a member of the new United Nations Human Rights Council. 
Actions Requested
Please
write to the authorities in the People’s Republic of China
urging them to:
i.                    
Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and
psychological integrity of Ms. Ni Yulan, Mr. Dong Jiqin, Mr. Li Tie, Mr. Jin Guanghong and Mr. Wei Qiang; 
ii.                  
Guarantee Ms. Ni Yulan, Mr. Dong Jiqin and Mr. Lie Tie immediate and
full access to a lawyer of their choice, their family as well as guarantee that they are examined by independent doctors and
receive adequate medical care, in accordance, inter alia, with the recommendations of the UN Standard Minimum
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners; 
iii.                 
Order Ms. Ni Yulan, Mr. Dong
Jiqin and Mr. Li Tie's immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges
that are consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges
exist, bring them before an impartial, independent, competent and fair tribunal and
guarantee their procedural rights at all times; 
iv.                
Carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent
and impartial investigation into the aforementioned facts, including the
allegations of torture and ill-treatment, in accordance with international
human rights standards, the result of which must be made public, in order to
bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal
and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; 
v.                  
Ensure that adequate,
effective and prompt reparation, including adequate compensation and
rehabilitation, is granted to the victims concerned;
vi.                
Guarantee the respect of human rights and the
fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws
and international human rights standards.
Addresses
·  
   Mr. Wen Jiabao, Prime Minister of the
People’s Republic of China, Guojia Zongli, The State Council General Office, 2
Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 65961109 (c/o Ministry of Foreign Affairs)
·      Mr. Wu
Aiying, Minister of Justice of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang Sifabu,
10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People’s Republic of
China, Fax: +86 10 6529 2345, minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cn
·      Mr. Yang
Jiechi, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang
Waijiaobu, 2 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Beijingshi 100701, People’s Republic of
China, Fax: +86 10 6588 2594, Email: ipc@fmprc.gov.cn;
·  
   Mr. Meng
Jianzhu, Minister of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China,
Buzhang, Gong’anbu, 14 Dongchang’anjie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100741,
People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 63099216
·  
   Mr. Fu Zhenghua, Director of the Beijing
Public Security Bureau, Juzhang, Beijingshi Gong’anju, 9 Qianmen Dongdajie,
Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100740, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10
85222320, Email: wbjc2sohu.com

Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of
China, Ch. De
Surville, CP 85, 1213 Petit-Lancy 2, Suisse, e-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int,
Fax : +41 22 793 70 14

Please also write to the
embassies of the People’s Republic of China in your respective
country.
Geneva, 3 June 2011.
***
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.






[1] See OMCT urgent appeal CHN 310708 and CHN 310708.1


[2] The 2011 Chinese “Jasmine
Revolution” protests
refer to weekly pro-democracy street actions in over a dozen cities in China starting on 20
February 2011.
An anonymous call for protest was initially published on line on 19
February 2011,
particularly on Twitter, suggesting specific places in 12 to 13 cities, where
people should gather. The place suggested for Beijing was the Wangfujing
McDonald’s. 