Mauritania:  Mauritania: forced disappearance and risk to the personal integrity of Mr. Matalla, an escaped slave
February  9, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Mauritania / 2004 / FebruaryMauritania: Mauritania: forced disappearance and risk to the personal integrity of Mr. Matalla, an escaped slaveCase MRT 090204 Forced disappearance / Risk to personal integrity / Slavery   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT  intervention in the following situation in Mauritania.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by SOS  Slaves, a member of the OMCT network, of the forced disappearance and  risk to the personal integrity of Mr. Matalla, an escaped slave, in  the city of Zouérate, Mauritania.  According to the information received, a man named Matalla, age 20,  who had fled from slavery having received death threats, was taken  into custody by the military on January 18th, 2004. On orders from  the local governor, the military placed Matalla in the custody of the  local police on January 20th, 2004: he was handed over to the brigade  commander at Bir Mogreon. Our sources have expressed grave concerns  for his physical and psychological integrity due to the possibility  that he might be returned to slavery under his "masters" from the  Rgueïbatt tribe. Of particular note is the fact that these "masters"  have threatened to kill him if should flee like his older brother had  done some 2-3 years ago. All attempts to make contact with the local  authorities concerning Mr. Matalla's whereabouts and condition have  failed thus far.  Mr. Matalla left behind a family of eleven, including his mother,  three sisters, and seven brothers, who are all believed to still be  in the most basic form of slavery. None of the children have a known  father, and they have received no education during their exposure to  forced labour and exploitation. Matalla served his masters by  shepherding goats, and he fled from them after they threatened his  life.   OMCT is seriously concerned for the physical and psychological  integrity of Matalla, given that his whereabouts remain unknown and  that he runs a grave risk of being returned to his "masters" who have  previously threatened to kill him should he escape. OMCT welcomes the  recent adoption of a law in Mauritania that prohibits trafficking in  persons (law No 2003-025 of July 17th, 2003) but remains gravely  concerned by the ongoing existence of slavery in Mauritania and calls  upon the authorities to take all necessary measures to ensure that it  is abolished.   Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Mauritania urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to locate and guarantee the physical  and psychological integrity of Mr. Matalla and that of the members of  his family; ii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental  freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and  international human rights  standards.  Addresses  ·	Mr. Mohamed Saleck Ould Mohamed Lemine, Ambassador, Permanent  Mission to the United Nations Offices in Geneva, Avenue Blanc 46,  1202 Geneva, Switzerland; fax: 022 9061841; e-mail:  mission.mauritania@ties.itu.int  Please also write to the embassies of Mauritania in your respective  country.  Geneva, February 9th, 2004  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this  appeal in your reply. 