Thailand:  Free Somyot and promote public debate on lèse-majesté
April 29, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2014 / AprilThailand: Free Somyot and promote public debate on lèse-majestéThailand_2301151 page / 129 KB

Paris-Bangkok-Geneva, April
29, 2014. Thailand must release labour rights activist Somyot
Prueksakasemsuk and promote a free, open, and informed public debate on lèse-majesté,
FIDH and OMCT, within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, and Union for Civil Liberty (UCL) said today. On April
30, Somyot, a UCL member and the former editor of the Voice of Taksin magazine, will mark three years in
jail. Somyot is serving a 10-year-jail sentence for lèse-majesté plus one year for an earlier suspended sentence for defamation, and is currently incarcerated in Bangkok’s Remand Prison. On April 30, 2011, authorities arrested Somyot and
subsequently charged him under Article 112 of the Thai Criminal Code. Article
112 states that “whoever defames, insults or threatens the King, the Queen, the
Heir to the throne or the Regent shall be punished with imprisonment of three
to 15 years”. On January 23, 2012, the Bangkok Criminal Court found Somyot
guilty of lèse-majesté for allowing the publication of two articles in the Voice
of Taksin that the Court found were critical of the monarchy. On April 1,
2013, Somyot filed an appeal against his conviction. Despite the pending
appeal, court officials have denied Somyot’s requests for bail 15 times.
 
“Thailand must release Somyot and all other
individuals who are unjustly detained under Article 112”, urged FIDH
President Karim Lahidji. “They are the victims of a draconian law that
violates the country’s legal obligations under the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights. Article 112’s overly broad definition
of lèse-majesté imposes unacceptable restrictions on the right to freedom of
expression and prescribes disproportionate penalties for its violators”,
Mr. Lahidji added.
 
Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (ICCPR), to which Thailand is a State party, says that everyone
has the right to freedom of expression. This right includes “freedom to seek,
receive, and impart information and ideas of all kinds.” In 2011, the UN Human
Rights Committee (CCPR), the body that monitors compliance with the provisions
of the ICCPR by State parties, said that “all public figures, including those
exercising the highest political authority such as heads of state and
government, are legitimately subject to criticism and political opposition”.
The CCPR specifically expressed concern regarding lèse-majesté laws[1].
 
On August 30, 2012, the UN Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention (WGAD) found that Somyot’s detention was arbitrary. The WGAD called
on Thailand to release Somyot and accord him an “enforceable right to
compensation”[2].
 
In addition to Somyot, four other people (including
two women) are currently incarcerated under Article 112 of the Thai Criminal
Code[3].
Many others have been released after receiving a royal pardon. Amid Thailand’s
ongoing political turmoil, which began with the ouster of then-Prime Minister
Thaksin Shinawatra in a military coup in 2006, the number of Thailand’s
lèse-majesté cases has dramatically increased. Under Article 112 of the Thai
Criminal Code, any person can file a lèse-majesté complaint. In Thailand’s politically
polarised environment, individuals have often used lèse-majesté complaints to
attack and silence human rights defenders and political opponents.
 
“The Thai government must introduce urgent
amendments to lèse-majesté laws. First and foremost, the power to file a
complaint under Article 112 must be solely reserved to the Bureau of the Royal
Household. Second, the criminal penalties for violators must be drastically
reduced”, said UCL Chairman Jaturong Boonyarattanasoontorn.
 
“Somyot’s appeal should be reviewed on the
basis of objective criteria without any further delay, in the framework of
which he should be acquitted of all charges”, urged OMCT Secretary
General Gerald Staberock. Moreover, Thailand should promote a
free, open, and informed public debate on the reform of lèse-majesté law, in
the hope that such a discussion would ensure that protection of the monarchy
does not impinge on freedom of expression”, Mr. Staberock concluded.
 
Press contacts:
·    
UCL: Mr. Jaturong Boonyarattanasoontorn (Thai, English) -
Tel: +66890571755 (Bangkok)
·    
FIDH: Mr. Arthur Manet - Tel: +33 6 72 28 42 94 and Ms.
Audrey Couprie - Tel: +33 6 48 05 91 57 (Paris)
·   
OMCT: Ms. Delphine Reculeau- Tel: +41 22 809 49 39
(Geneva)



[1] Human Rights Committee, 102nd session,
General comment No. 34 - Article 19: Freedoms of opinion and expression, 12
September 2011; UN Doc. CCPR/C/GC/34 para.38.


[2] Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD), Opinions
adopted by the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention at its sixty-fourth session,
27–31 August 2012; UN Doc. A/HRC/WGAD/2012/35.


[3] Daranee Chancherngsilpakul (F), serving 15 years in
jail; Kittithon Yamsamai (M), six years and eight months; Ekkachai Hongkangwan
(M), three years and four months; Papatchanan Ching-in (F), three years and 10
days. 