India:  Arbitrary detention of Dalit rights defender Chandrashekhar Azad Ravan in Uttar Pradesh
May 17, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / India / 2018 / MayIndia: Arbitrary detention of Dalit rights defender Chandrashekhar Azad Ravan in Uttar Pradesh​IND 004 / 0518 / OBS 065Arbitrary detention / 
Judicial harassment
India
May 17, 2018
 
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent intervention in the following situation
in India.
 
Brief description
of the information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by
reliable sources about the arbitrary detention of
Mr. Chandrashekhar Azad Ravan, a
Dalit human rights defender in Saharanpur, Uttar Pradesh State[1].
 
According
to the information received, Mr. Chandrashekhar Azad Ravan has been detained since his arrest on June 8, 2017, following protests during which Dalit
and Thakur communities clashed in Saharanpur in
May 2017[2].
However, Mr. Azad was not present during
the protests. He was arrested along with 40 other prominent activists
and leaders of “Bhim Army”, a Dalit human rights organisation, all of whom were subsequently granted bail.
 
23 charges were filed against him, including charges
of “rioting”, “armed with deadly weapons”, “unlawful
assembly”, “attempt to murder”, “assaulting public servants”, “trespassing”,
and “breach of peace” in relation to the
above-mentioned clashes.
 
On
November 2, 2017, the Allahabad High Court granted bail to Mr. Azad in all the
cases against him, as the police could not provide evidence of his specific
role in the incidents of violence or of possessing weapons of any kind.
 
However,
within hours of the High Court order, on November 3, 2017, the Uttar Pradesh
Government placed Mr. Azad under administrative detention under the National
Security Act (NSA), until February 2018.
The NSA allows the Government to hold a person without bail for up to a
year.
 
On
January 27, 2018, Mr. Azad’s detention under the NSA was extended until May 2, 2018.
On that day, a non-judicial ‘advisory board' established under the NSA put him
in jail for another six months i.e. until November 2, 2018. 
 
At
the time of publication of this Urgent Appeal, Mr. Azad remained detained at
Saharanpur jail, Uttar Pradesh State.
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the
arbitrary detention of Mr. Chandrashekhar Azad under the NSA, which seems aimed at
impinging on his legitimate activities to protect
Dalit rights. It further condemns what appears to be a deliberate misuse of the
NSA to curb Mr. Azad’s human rights activities.
 
The Observatory urges the Indian authorities to release Mr. Azad immediately
and unconditionally and to put an end to all forms of harassment against him,
including at the judicial level. 
 
Actions requested: 
 
Please write to the authorities in India,
urging them to:
 
i.
Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and
psychological integrity of Mr. Chandrashekhar
Azad Ravan and
all human rights defenders in India;
 
ii. Ensure the immediate and unconditional release of Mr.
Chandrashekhar Azad Ravan, since his detention is arbitrary and it is merely
aimed at punishing him for his human rights activities;
 
iii.
Put an end to all acts of harassment - including at
the judicial level - against Mr. Chandrashekhar Azad Ravan and all human rights defenders in India, and ensure in all
circumstances that they are able to carry out their legitimate activities
without any hindrance and fear of reprisals;
 
iv. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9,
1998, in particular with Articles, 12.1 and 12.2;
 
v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by India.
 
Please also write to the National Human Rights Commission of India,
urging it to: 
 
vi. Exercise its powers under the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993,
and immediately intervene in this case of Mr. Chandrashekhar
Azad Ravan through an independent investigation from its Focal Point on Human
Rights Defenders;
 
vii.
Ensure that laws like the NSA are not misused against human rights defenders to
curtail their legitimate peaceful human rights work.
 
Addresses: 
 
·    
Mr. Shri Narendra Damodardas
Modi, Prime Minister of India, Fax: + 91 11 2301 6857. E-mail: pmosb@pmo.nic.in / manmo@sansad.in
·    
Mr. Raj Nath Singh, Union
Minister of Home Affairs of India, Fax: +91 11 2309 2979. Email: dirfcra-mha@gov.in
·    
Mr. Rajiv Gauba, Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs of India, Email: hshso@nic.in
·    
Justice Dipak Misra, Chief Justice of India,
Supreme Court, of India, Fax: +91 11 233 83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.in
·    
Justice Shri H.L. Dattu, Chairperson of the National
Human Rights Commission of India, Fax +91 11 2465 1329. Email: chairnhrc@nic.in
·    
Mr. Srinivasa Kammath, Focal Point on Human Rights Defenders, National
Human Rights Commission of India, Email: hrd-nhrc@nic.in
·    
H.E. Mr. Rajiv Kumar Chander, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of India to the
United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 906 86 96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
·    
H.E. Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri,
Embassy of India to the European Union, Belgium and Luxembourg in Brussels,
Belgium, Fax: +32 2 6489638 / +32 2 6451869
 
Please also write to the
diplomatic mission or embassy of India located in your country.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, May 17, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this
programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.




[1] Mr. Azad Ravan is the
co-founder of the ‘Bhim Army’, an organisation of Dalit volunteers challenging
caste oppression. The organisation intervenes in instances of caste oppression
and runs free schools for Dalit youth in western Uttar Pradesh State. In recent
years, the Bhim Army has intervened in instances of caste atrocities and
challenged the caste hierarchy. 


[2] During the clashes, two
Dalit men were killed and many houses belonging to Dalits were torched. The
district administration through the local media had deliberately falsely
accused the Bhim Army of being ‘Naxalites’, ‘terrorists’. 