China:  Call for an impartial investigation into acts of harassment against Mr. Wu Zeheng
December 16, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / China / 2011 / DecemberChina: Call for an impartial investigation into acts of harassment against Mr. Wu Zeheng
OPEN LETTER TO THE AUTHORITIES - THE 
OBSERVATORY
 
Open Letter to Mr. Wen Jiabao, Prime 
Minister
and Mr. Meng Jianzhu, Minister of Public 
Security
People’s Republic of China
 
Paris-Geneva, December 16, 2011
 
Re: Call for an impartial investigation into acts of harassment 
against Mr. Wu Zeheng
 
Your Excellencies, 
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), express its deepest concern about the 
impunity of acts of harassment against Mr. Wu Zeheng, a prominent Buddhist leader, also known as Buddhist Zen Master Shi 
Xingwu, known for his commitment towards greater respect of human rights and the 
rule of law principles and his fight against corruption.
 
According to the information received, on May 9, 2011, the eve of an 
important Buddhist holiday (the commemoration of Buddha Sakyamuni's birthday), 
in front of several witnesses, Mr. Wu Zeheng was beaten, threatened and forcibly 
arrested by officers belonging to the Zhu-hai police. At 9 pm, eight policemen 
forcefully entered Mr. Wu's residence and seized him, his young sister and two 
other students and searched all rooms, without presenting any search warrant or 
any other legal documentation authorising their action. Double-handcuffed, Mr. 
Wu was forcefully taken to the police for questioning, without allowing him to 
even put on his shoes. Several followers present in his house at the time were 
also taken in for questioning. Along the way, Mr. Luo Yu, Director of the 
Zhu-hai Qian-shan Police station (ID No. 082846), beat him on the head with a 
mobile phone and yelled offensive comments. During the interrogation, which went 
on until 10 am the following morning, the police told him “We can do anything we 
want. We can arrest you any time if we want and that is our right”. He was told 
that he would not be allowed to do anything and that only if he remains in his 
home town, he would not be bothered. He was also warned not to participate in 
Buddhist ceremonies nor to have his students visit him. He was held in detention 
for 24 hours. Mr. Wu and his followers were released without charge and without 
being provided any legal document explaining or justifying the police actions. 

 
According to the police interrogators, Mr. Wu and his followers were 
detained on “suspicion of intending to organise an illegal assembly”. Despite 
complaints filed on May 16, 2011 with the Xiang-zhou Public Security Bureau 
(PSB) of Zhu-hai city, these acts of harassment remain today unpunished. 
According to a written notice in response to the complaints, bearing the seal of 
the Xiang-zhou PSB of Zhu-hai and dated July 4, 2011, the Bureau stated “no 
illegal enforcement of the law and assault of citizens” have occurred during the 
police actions on May 9. 
 
Over the last four months, Mr. Wu Zeheng's home has been visited by 
the police at least on five occasions. Each time, the police come in, ask him 
about his activities, and make clear by their presence that he is being closely 
watched.
 
Since his release from prison on February 28, 2010, where he served a 
11-year prison term on spurious accusations of “economic crimes” that followed a 
letter he sent in 1998 to the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China 
and State Council to denounce human rights violations and call for reform, Mr. 
Wu Zeheng has been subjected to close surveillance by the Chinese authorities as 
well as various forms of persecutions (stalking, beatings, insults, theft, 
travel restrictions, etc.). 
 
The Observatory condemns the above-mentioned acts of harassment, 
which merely seem to aim at intimidating Mr. Wu Zeheng for his human rights 
activities, as well as the on-going impunity for these acts. It calls on your 
Excellencies to cease any action aimed at preventing Mr. Wu Zeheng from carrying 
out human rights activities and that an effective, thorough and impartial 
investigation into the above-mentioned events is immediately carried out, the 
result of which must be made public, in order to identify all those responsible, 
bring them before a civil, competent and impartial tribunal and apply to them 
the penal sanctions provided by the law.
 
We respectfully remind you that the United Nations Declaration on the 
Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote 
and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, 
adopted by consensus by the UN General Assembly on 9 December 1998, recognises 
the legitimacy of the activities of human rights defenders, their right to 
freedom of association and calls on States to ensure that they can carry out 
their activities without fear of reprisals.  

 
We would particularly draw attention to Article 6: “Everyone has the right, individually and in association with others: 
(c) To study, discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law and 
in practice, of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through these and 
other appropriate means, to draw public attention to those 
matters”, and to Article 12: “(1) Everyone has the right, individually and in association with 
others, to participate in peaceful activities against violations of human rights 
and fundamental freedoms. (2) The State shall take all necessary measures to 
ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and 
in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto 
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a 
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the 
present Declaration”.
 
We respectfully thank your Excellencies for your attention in this 
matter and express our sincere hope that your Excellencies will take these 
considerations into account.
 
Yours sincerely,
 




Souhayr Belhassen
FIDH President

Gerald Staberock
OMCT Secretary General 