Cambodia:  Harassment, arrest, and detention of human rights defenders continue
January 22, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2014 / JanuaryCambodia: Harassment, arrest, and detention of human rights defenders continuePhnom
Penh, Paris, Geneva, January 22 – FIDH and the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, the Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association
(ADHOC), the Cambodian League for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights
(LICADHO), and the Cambodian Center for Human Rights (CCHR) express their
concern over the Cambodian authorities’ ongoing harassment, arbitrary arrest,
and detention of human rights defenders.
“The Cambodian government
must comply with its obligations under international law and ensure that human
rights defenders can conduct peaceful activities without fear of being harassed
and arbitrarily arrested,” FIDH President Karim Lahidji said. “This includes
lifting a blanket ban on public demonstrations, which contravenes Article 21 of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which Cambodia is
a state party,” Mr. Lahidji added.
On the morning
of January 21, 2014, security forces arrested and took into custody 11 human
rights defenders for several hours at Phnom Penh Municipal Police Station. The
11 had attempted to submit petitions to foreign embassies, including those of
the US and France, which called for the release of 23 demonstrators who
authorities detained in a crackdown on striking garment workers on January 2-3.
While it is unclear why the 11 were detained, it is widely believed that they
were detained for violating a verbal ban on public gatherings by more than 10
people, which the Cambodian Ministry of Interior issued on January 4.
Those
arrested on January 21 are as follows: Boeung Kak Lake community human rights defenders Mmes. Tep Vanny, Yorm Bopha,
Song Sreyleap, Pan Chunreth, Erm Sreytouch, Bov Sorphea,
and Ngoun Kimlang; Cambodian Independent Teachers Association (CITA)
President Mr. Rong Chhun; Cambodian Alliance of Trade Unions (CATU)
member Ms. Cheang Thida; Housing Rights Task Force (HRTF) member Ms. Long
Kim Heang; and rights activist Ms. Choung Sopheap. All 11 were
released later in the day after they were forced to sign statements pledging
that they would not join, lead or incite ‘illegal’ activities or protests in
the future.
“Freedom of assembly may
be displeasing for the authorities but it is not an illegal activity. It
remains a right that nobody can be forced to give up while in police custody,”
OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock said. “One cannot say it more often:
far from being the cure to a problem history is replete with examples that
quelling dissent only exacerbates tensions,” Mr. Staberock added.
On
January 6, Boeung Kak Lake community human rights defenders Tep Vanny, Yorm
Bopha, Bo Chhorvy, Song Sreyleap and Pan Chunreth had
previously been arrested and taken into custody by authorities in Phnom Penh
for several hours for attempting to submit a similar petition to the French
embassy calling for the release of the 23 demonstrators. In addition to the
unlawful detentions, on January 19, pro-government security guards and thugs
wearing black helmets and armed with batons used excessive force to disperse a
small group of activists and NGO leaders. The group had gathered to conduct a
peaceful prayer vigil near the Royal Palace in central Phnom Penh for the
release of the 23 detained individuals and to show support for their demand to
increase the minimum wage for workers. Police also detained overnight at the Phnom
Penh Municipal Police Station one of the
organizers of the prayer vigil, Independent Democracy of Informal Economy
Association (IDEA) Vice-President Sokchhun Oeung. On both January 6 and
19, the human rights defenders were released after signing a similar letter
agreeing to cease demonstrating.
The
Observatory, ADHOC, LICADHO and CCHR call for the immediate lift of the verbal
ban on public gatherings by more than 10 people, in which context the
above-mentioned arrests occurred. 
“The current ban on
assemblies is unlawful, seriously disproportionate, and excessively broad and
violates Cambodia’s domestic and international obligations. The ban on
assemblies and the subsequent arrests are politically motivated and serve only
the purpose of protecting the current government from criticism,” CCHR Program
Director Sopheap Chak said.
The
Observatory, ADHOC, LICADHO, and CCHR also urge the Cambodian government to
immediately and unconditionally release on bail all 23 demonstrators detained
in Correctional Center 3 (CC3) and in Kampong Cham prison, both located in
Kampong Cham Province. 
Our
organizations further call on the authorities to stop using force to repress
human rights defenders’ peaceful and legitimate activities. They also condemn
the use of pro-government, unofficial security guards to arrest and detain
activists and human rights defenders.
“The security forces’
brutality against unarmed peaceful protesters has become the norm in Cambodia,”
LICADHO Director Naly Pilorge said. “The international community should take
note of this alarming trend and demand the government put an end to the
repression of non-violent dissent,” Ms. Pilorge urged.
The
Observatory, ADHOC, LICADHO, and CCHR reiterate their call for a quick,
thorough, and independent investigation into the use of lethal force to
suppress a workers’ strike on January 3.
“The government’s delay
in investigating the deadly January 3 crackdown has emboldened security forces
to step up abuses against peaceful demonstrators. Holding those responsible for
the January 3 crackdown accountable will send a clear message that heavy-handed
actions are no longer tolerated,” ADHOC President Thun Saray said.
On
January 2-3, security forces arrested 23 people, including garment workers and
human rights defenders, during a brutal crackdown on striking garment workers
at two separate locations in Phnom Penh. Among those detained were: Vorn Pov,
President of the IDEA; Theng Savuen, Coordinator of the Coalition of
Cambodian Farmer Community (CCFC); and Chan Puthisak, a human rights
defender from the Boeung Kak Lake community. At least four people were killed
and more than 20 suffered bullet wounds in the January 3 crackdown.
On
January 16, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in Cambodia Surya Subedi condemned the incommunicado detention for several days
of the 23 individuals detained on 2
and 3 January, and urged that the authorities
seek their immediate release on bail. 