Russian Federation:  Utmost concern over new bill on Non-Commercial Organisations (NCOs)
July  6, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2012 / JulyRussian Federation: Utmost concern over new bill on Non-Commercial Organisations (NCOs)

PRESS RELEASE -
THE OBSERVATORY

 
 
RUSSIAN
FEDERATION: Utmost concern over new bill on Non-Commercial Organisations (NCOs)
 
Paris-Geneva,
July 6, 2012 – The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) expresses its utmost concern over the
tabling of a new bill on non-commercial organisations (NCOs) which – if adopted
– would significantly undermine the capacities of the civil society to operate
in the Russian Federation.
 
On
June 29, 2012, pro-governmental party “United Russia” Members of Parliament
submitted to the Duma a bill entitled “Introducing Amendments to Legislative
Acts of the Russian Federation in Part Regulating Activities of Non-commercial
Organisations, which Carry Functions of Foreign Agents”.  
 
The
bill aims at amending six federal laws, including the Laws “on Public
Associations”, “On Non-commercial Organisations”, “On Counteracting
Legalisation (Money Laundering) of Incomes received in a Criminal Way, and
Financing Terrorism”, as well as the Code of Administrative Penalties, the
Criminal Code and the Code on Criminal Procedure. 
 
If
adopted, the bill will represent a major additional setback to the enjoyment of
human rights in the country, and would blatantly violate the most basic
international human rights standards on freedom of association.
 
NCOs
receiving foreign funding labelled as “foreign agents”
 
The
new bill provides that all NCOs wishing to receive foreign funds from foreign
sources in order to carry out any kind of “political activities” shall first
register with an “authorised government agency” within the Ministry of Justice.
Such organisations would then be officially labelled as “NCOs carrying
functions of a foreign agent”.
 
Overly
wide definition of “political activities” carried out by “foreign agent NCOs”
 
The
current text defines “political activities” as actions “dedicated to changing
state policy” and “influencing public opinion relating to changing public
policy”. This vague definition could potentially allow the Russian authorities
to target all advocacy activities carried out by human rights NGOs which by
definition purport to influence public policy and public opinion in an attempt
to improve respect of human rights standards.
 
Undefined
registration procedure for “foreign agent NCOs”
 
The
registration procedure for “foreign agent NCOs” is not described in the current
version of the bill. It is only mentioned that such procedure is to be defined
by the “authorised government agency”. The Observatory fears that this might
result in the imposition of burdensome and complex procedures, in an attempt to
further hinder the conduct of legitimate human rights activities.
 
Tight
control over the actions and publications of “foreign agent NCOs”
 
The
bill also provides that as soon as an NCO is labelled as “foreign agent”, its
activities shall be placed under the strict control of the “authorised
government agency”, as it would be requested to:
 
-       
undergo annual audits
-       
maintain separate
accounting of assets generated through local and foreign sources
-       
submit activity reports
twice a year
-       
submit financial reports
every quarter
 
No
information is yet available regarding the format and the content of such
reports, which shall be later determined by the “authorised government agency”.
 
Furthermore, anybody or any entity that would reproduce documentation of
“foreign agent NCOs” would in turn be considered itself as “foreign agents”,
even if no foreign funds were received by the latter to finance the publication
of the materials.
 
Disproportionate
monitoring of - and interference in - the activities of foreign NGOs with
registered offices in Russia
 
The
bill submits the Russia-based registered offices of foreign organisations to
two new major requirements, i.e.:
 
-       
to undergo annual
independent audits by a Russian auditing company and submit the audit report to
the “authorised government agency”;
 
-       
to undergo any further
audits decided / conducted by the “authorised government agency” itself.
 
The
“authorised government agency” will have the right to publish all such reports
as well as the activity and financial reports of foreign organisations
operating in Russia on its website, and to provide them to the media.
 
Disproportionate
monitoring of the foreign funds received by Russian offices of foreign NGOs
 
Under
the terms of the bill, special controls will be imposed on all transfers
received by NCOs from foreign sources above 200,000 Rubles (4,928 Euros). No
information could be obtained as of what such controls would encompass and how
they would be carried out.
 
Extensive
powers to sanction and suspend the activities of NCOs
 
The
bill provides that the Government shall have the authority to suspend the
activities of any “foreign agent NCO” for up to 6 months if the latter fails to
register as a “foreign agent” while receiving foreign funding and conducting
so-called “political activities”. 
 
The
bill also introduces the following harsh penalties:
 
-
up to 50,000 Rubles (1,232 Euros) for individuals and up to 1,000,000 Rubles
(24,639  Euros) for NCOs failing to
submit “information required by the law”.
 
-
up to 500,000 Rubles (12,320 Euros) for individuals and up to 1,000,000 Rubles
(24,639 Euros) for organisations which conduct activities without being
registered as a foreign agent when such registration is required. 
 
The
bill further amends the Criminal Code to introduce a penalty of either up to 2
years of imprisonment or up to 480 hours of corrective work for individuals who
do not fulfil their responsibilities under the law while acting as “foreign
agents”. 
 
Consequently,
NGOs will then have to choose between registering themselves as “foreign
agents” or be heavily penalised under criminal law for not doing so. The
Observatory fears that labelling human rights defenders and social activists as
“foreign agents” for receiving foreign funding would seriously harm their image
and credibility, and dissuade the population from trusting and confiding in
them and their work, and acting on their advice.
 
***
 
The
Observatory denounces the provisions of this bill, which blatantly violates
international and regional human rights standards relating to freedom of
association, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR) and the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) ratified by the
Russian Federation, as well as the 1998 United Nations Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders, and in particular Article 5 (on the right “to form, join and
participate in non-governmental organisations, associations or groups" and
“to communicate with non-governmental or intergovernmental organizations”) and
Article 13 (on the right “to solicit, receive and utilize resources for the
express purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental
freedoms through peaceful means”). As emphasized by the UN Special Rapporteur
on the protection of human rights defenders, the Declaration protects the right
to receive funding from different sources, including foreign funding[1].
 
The
Observatory is all the more concerned that such a bill is being presented only
three weeks after the adoption of another piece of legislation which restricts
the right to conduct peaceful assemblies and demonstrations in the country.
 
The
Observatory therefore strongly urges the Russian Members of Parliament not to
adopt this bill and withdraw it, and, generally, to conform in all
circumstances with international human rights law, and in particular with the
best practices defined by the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Freedom of
Assembly and Association in his first report to the UN Human Rights Council.
 
For
more information, please contact:
FIDH:
Karine Appy/Arthur Manet: +33 1 43 55 25 18
OMCT:
Isabelle Scherer: +41 22 809 49 39
 



[1]              See UN Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders, Commentary to the
Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs
of Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognised Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms, July 2011. 