Internship at the Brussels Office of the OMCT
September  6, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / 2016 / SeptemberInternship at the Brussels Office of the OMCTInternship Description2 pages / 310 KB


INFORMATION ABOUT THE HOSTING ORGANISATION

 
Created
in 1985, the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) is today the main
international coalition of NGOs fighting against torture, summary executions,
enforced disappearances and all other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. With 297 affiliated organisations
in its SOS-Torture Network, OMCT is the most important network of
non-governmental organisations working for the protection and the promotion of
human rights in the world. 
 
Based in Geneva and Brussels, OMCT International
Secretariat provides personalised medical, legal and/or social assistance to
victims of torture and ensures the daily dissemination of urgent interventions
across the world, in order to prevent serious human rights violations, to
protect individuals and to fight against impunity. Moreover, some of its
activities aim at protecting specific categories of vulnerable people, such as
women, children and human rights defenders. In the framework of its activities,
OMCT also submits individual communications and alternative reports to the
United Nations mechanisms, and actively collaborates in the respect,
development and strengthening of international norms for the protection of
human rights. 
 
More specifically, based in Brussels, OMCT Europe
assists in developing OMCT’s mandate in Europe and maintains regular contact
between European institutions and OMCT’s International Secretariat. OMCT Europe’s main goal is to appeal for a more
coherent and effective European human rights policy. At the internal level, it
advocates for the EU to integrate the various international human rights norms
into its legislation. At the external level, OMCT Europe appeals for the
creation of a control mechanism on Union activities and the measures it adopts.
This double requirement aims to ensure a real coherence in the EU’s external
policy so that respect for human rights is recognised as an essential element
for peace and security, and that it becomes incontrovertible at all levels of
the EU’s foreign policy.
 
Created in 1997 jointly by OMCT and FIDH, the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders is the leading global programme on the
protection of human rights defenders. It bases its action on the conviction
that solidarity with and among human rights defenders and their organisations ensures that their voice is being heard and their
isolation and marginalisation broken. It responds to threats and acts of reprisals suffered
by human rights defenders through urgent interventions, vital emergency
assistance for those in need, international missions and advocacy for their
effective domestic or international protection.
 
 

TASKS TO BE PERFORMED BY THE INTERN DURING THE INTERNSHIP

 
Based in Brussels, the incumbent will
work under the supervision of the Head of OMCT Office in Brussels and the Human
Right Officer of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders. The
intern will under the guidance of experienced staff at the OMCT implement a
variety of diverse tasks on projects of both OMCT Europe and the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, providing a unique and
challenging opportunity of learning about concrete human rights advocacy at the
global and European levels.
 
Activities of the position include:
-       
To assist with OMCT Europe’s advocacy activities towards EU
institutions for an effective policy for the protection of
human rights defenders and against torture.
-       
To assist with the drafting of OMCT’s briefings in its programmatic
areas, and with OMCT’s submissions to UN and regional human rights mechanisms.
-       
To assist in the drafting of urgent interventions on individual cases
and other advocacy interventions on cases or legal developments affecting human
rights defenders.
-       
To assist with the organisation of field missions.
-       
To assist with the organisation of seminars and conferences.
-       
To assist OMCT’s grants officer with individual grants to HRDs and
grants to local organisations.
-       
To attend meetings and sessions of European bodies.
-       
To assist with other activities of the Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders and OMCT Europe.
 
 

QUALIFICATIONS REQUIRED

 
-       
University degree in law, international relations, social sciences or
related field. Specific expertise on human rights would be an asset.
-       
Good knowledge of EU institutions, UN procedures and regional mechanisms
for the protection of human rights.
-       
Good drafting and editing skills.
-       
Ability to work under pressure to deadlines and to adapt to
multidisciplinary work in the environment of a multicultural team.
-       
Good interpersonal and communication skills.
-       
Fluency in English and Spanish.
-       
Fluency in French would be a particular asset.

 
 
STARTING DATE & CONDITIONS

 
Starting date: As soon as possible.
 
Length: Minimum of four months.
 
Deadline for applications: September 16th.
 
Please note
that our internships are unpaid. Schedule can be flexible and would be agreed
between the supervisor and the intern.
 
 

TO APPLY:

 
Please send
your CV by email to omcteurope@omct.org
 
Short-listed  candidates 
will be invited  for  interviews. 
Successful candidates will be notified shortly after the interview.
 
Interviews will
be held in our offices in Brussels (Rue Stevin 115).
 
 
OTHER
 
For more information on OMCT, please visit our
website: www.omct.org, http://www.omct.org/human-rights-defenders/
and http://www.omct.org/omct-europe/. 