Israel:  Release of Mr. Salah Hamouri
October  8, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2018 / OctoberIsrael: Release of Mr. Salah Hamouri  



New information

ISR 001 / 0917 / OBS 096.2

Release on bail /

Harassment

Israel /

Occupied Palestinian Territory

October 8, 2018

 

The
 Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership
 of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received
 new information and requests your intervention in the following 
situation in Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territory.

 

New information:
 


The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the release on bail of Mr. Salah Hamouri, a Franco-Palestinian lawyer and field researcher with Addameer Prisoner Support and Human Rights Association (Addameer)[1] in the Occupied Palestinian Territory.


According to the information received, on September 30, 2018, Mr. Salah 
Hamouri was finally released from Ketziot Prison’s section III (Neguev 
desert) by a decision from the Magistrate Court of Jerusalem, after more than a year in detention without charge or trial.
 The judge also banned Mr. Hamouri from celebrating his release, 
participating in any demonstration where flags are hold and in any 
gathering, meeting or activity for an illegal organisation for a period 
of 30 days. He was additionally ordered to pay a 3,000 shekels (709 EUR)
 bail for his release. Mr. Hamouri regained his family home in Al-Ram, 
East Jerusalem. There is no trial, investigation or other action 
continuing from the Israeli State against Mr. Salah Hamouri.


Arrested and placed under administrative detention on August 23, 2017 
over alleged “illegal activities” in the West Bank and Jerusalem, Mr. 
Salah Hamouri spent 13 months in detention (see background information 
below). The exact motives and charges against Mr. Salah Hamouri have so 
far remained confidential, as it is generally the case for Palestinians 
subjected to administrative detention and Israeli military justice.

 

The
 Observatory recalls that Mr. Salah Hamouri’s wife, Ms. Elsa Lefort, a 
French national, and their son, are banned by Israeli authorities from 
entering Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territory since 2016.

 

The
 Observatory welcomes the release of Mr. Salah Hamouri and thanks all 
individuals, organisations and institutions who intervened in his 
favour. It also recalls that he should have never been detained in the 
first place, as his detention was arbitrary and clearly aimed at 
punishing his legitimate human rights activities. The Observatory 
condemns and calls on the Israeli authorities to stop the practice of 
administrative detention targeting Palestinian civilians, including 
Palestinian human rights defenders. The Observatory further calls on the
 Israeli authorities to end any act of harassment, including at the 
judicial level, against Mr. Hamouri, his family, and all the human 
rights defenders in Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territory.

 

Background information:

 

On
 March 13, 2005, Mr. Salah Hamouri was arrested by the Israeli military 
at Qalqiliya checkpoint and sentenced to seven years in prison for his 
alleged involvement in a plot to assassinate Rabbi Ovadia Yosef, 
spiritual leader of the religious and ultra-orthodox party Shas, and 
former Chief Rabbi of Israel. Mr. Salah Hamouri was to be released on 
March 13, 2012, but instead, was set free on December 18, 2011, as part 
of the Wafa Al Ahrar prisoner exchange deal[2].

 

Subsequent
 to his re-arrest on August 23, 2017, on August 29, 2017, the Jerusalem 
Magistrate Court ordered his conditional release and his placement under
 house arrest in Al-Reineh for 20 days. The Court also banned Mr. Salah 
Hamouri from entering Jerusalem, from travelling outside the country for
 three months and ordered a 10,000 NIS (approx. 2642 Euros) bail.

 

However,
 when Mr. Salah Hamouri’s family went to pay the bail, they were told he
 would not be released and had received a six-month administrative 
detention order, which had been issued on August 23, 2017 by the 
Minister of Defence without being notified to Mr. Salah Hamouri.

 

On
 September 5, 2017, the Jerusalem District Court reinstated a sentence 
against Mr. Salah Hamouri originally issued in 2005 and ordered him to 
serve the remaining three-month sentence. This represents the time that 
was left for Mr. Salah Hamouri to serve prior to his release as part of 
the Wafa Al Ahrar exchange deal. A representative from the French 
Consulate in Jerusalem and Mr. Salah Hamouri’s father were prevented 
from entering the courtroom.


On September 7, 2017, Mr. Hamouri was transferred from al-Mascobiyeh 
(The Russian Compound) interrogation facility in Jerusalem to Ketziot 
(al-Naqab) prison’s section III.



On September 13, 2017, the Israeli Supreme Court annulled the Jerusalem District Court decision from September 5, 2017. 

 

On September 17, 2017, Jerusalem District Court confirmed a six-month administrative detention[3] against
 Mr. Salah Hamouri. Mr Hamouri was reportedly accused by Israeli 
authorities of being a member of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
 Palestine (PFLP) and a threat to national security in Jerusalem and 
surrounding areas in the West Bank.

 

Mr.
 Salah Hamouri’s administrative detention was renewed on February 26, 
2018 (4 months) and June 27, 2018 (3 months) by a Jerusalem District 
Tribunal. 

 

Actions requested:

 

Please write to the authorities of Israel urging them to:

 

i.
 Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
 of Mr. Salah Hamouri as well as that of all human rights defenders in 
Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territory;

 

ii.
 Put an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, 
against Mr. Salah Hamouri, his family, and all the human rights 
defenders in Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territory;

 

iii.
 Comply with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in 
particular its Articles 1 and 12.2;

 

iv.
 More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human 
rights and fundamental freedoms throughout Israel and the Occupied 
Palestinian Territory in accordance with international human rights 
instruments and satndards.

 

Addresses:

 

Mr. Benjamin Netanyahu, Prime Minister of Israel - Minister of Foreign Affairs; Fax: + 972 267 055 55 / 972-2-5303367; Email: b.netanyahu@pmo.gov.il, pm_eng@pmo.gov.il
Mr. Avigdor Liberman, Minister of Defense; Fax: +972 369 169 40; Email: aliberman@knesset.gov.il
Ms. Ayelet Shaked; Minister of Justice; Fax: +972 262 886 18; E-mail: sar@justice.gov.il
Mr. Shai Nitzan, State Attorney; Email: state-attorney@justice.gov.il
H.E.
 Ambassador Ms. Aviva Raz Shechter, Permanent Mission of Israel to the 
United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 716 05 55. Email: mission-israel@geneva.mfa.gov.il
H.E. Ambassador Simona Frankel; Embassy of Israel in Belgium and Luxembourg, Fax: +32 2 373.56.17; Email:web@brussels.mfa.gov.il

 

Please also write to the diplomatic representations of Israel in your respective countries.

 

***

Paris-Geneva, October 8, 2018

 

Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.

 

The
 Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the 
Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation 
Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to intervene 
to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights 
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 



[1]     
 Addameer (Arabic for conscience) is a Palestinian NGO that works to 
support Palestinian political prisoners held in Israeli and Palestinian 
prisons offering free legal aid to political prisoners, advocating their
 rights at the national and international levels, and working to end 
torture and other violations of prisoners' rights. It is also a member 
of OMCT SOS-Torture Network.



[2]     
 On October 18, 2011, 477 Palestinian prisoners were released from 
Israeli prisons as part of an exchange deal in which Israeli soldier 
Gilad Shalit, who had been abducted by Hamas in 2006, was released. 
Several of the freed Palestinian prisoners have been re-imprisoned since
 then. 



[3]     
 Administrative detention is a procedure that allows the Israeli 
military to hold prisoners indefinitely on secret information without 
charging them or allowing them to stand trial. For more information seehttp://www.addameer.org/israeli_military_judicial_system/administrative_detention 