Statement to the 34th session of the Human Rights Council: Interactive Dialogue with the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment
March  2, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / Bangladesh / 2017 / MarchStatement to the 34th session of the Human Rights Council: Interactive Dialogue with the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishmentUnited
Nations Human Rights Council - 34th
session

Interactive
Dialogue with the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment or punishment
Oral
Statement, World Organisation Against Torture
Thank you
Mr. President. 
Mr. Special
Rapporteur,
OMCT would like to thank you for your report. We share your concerns on the
increasing tolerance to the use of torture in the name of security and the
fight against terrorism. We commend your commitment to unequivocally reaffirm
the absolute and non-derogatory nature of torture, which is paramount in the
current changing political climate.
We also consider crucial your commitment
to address protection gaps of people on the move, including patterns of abuse
in transit countries and attempts to circumvent the non-refoulement principle
through mass expulsions and the externalization of border controls and asylum
proceedings. We also call for a systematic screening to identify the needs for
those who have suffered trauma to have access to treatment.
We commend your efforts to make the
implementation and protection gap a primary focus of your mandate. We believe
that the very first step towards an effective implementation of international
treaties, including the Convention against Torture, is for State Parties to
comply with their reporting obligations. However, to date many are the countries,
including Bangladesh, that are yet
to submit their initial report to the Committee against Torture. What actions
will you take in this regard?
OMCT welcomes your recent visit to Turkey and your appeal to the
government to publicly reinforce its zero-tolerance policy on torture. It is
vital that the situation continues to be monitored. We remain deeply troubled
by the skyrocketing of allegations of torture and ill-treatment reported since
the attempted coup d’état, amidst a
climate of fear and intimidation of victims, witnesses, lawyers and doctors
taking up such allegations. We are also deeply concerned about reports
indicating gross violations of human rights in the south-east part of the
country and about what it seems to be a systematization of torture under the
country’s state of emergency.
Mr. Melzer, could you identify
clearly which steps Turkey should take urgently to prevent the normalization of
torture as well as to ensure a climate that allows those who are documenting
torture and treating victims – no matter who the person may be - in Turkey? 
Finally, we welcome the outgoing SRT’s
reports on Sri Lanka, Mauritania and Mexico and strongly support his
recommendations. With regard to the latter, we would be grateful to know which
actions you plan to undertake in order to monitor the implementation of the
recommendations issued by the former SRT in its mission and follow up reports;
do you foresee a follow up visit to Mexico?
Thank you. 