China:  Enforced disappearance of monk Dorgay
July 22, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / China / 2011 / JulyChina: Enforced disappearance of monk DorgayCHN 220711
Enforced disappearance/
Arbitrary arrest/ Risk of torture and ill-treatment/ Fear for the safety 
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the People’s Republic of China.

Brief description of the situation
TheInternational
Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by The Tibetan Centre for Human Rights
and Democracy (TCHRD), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the enforced
disappearance of 22-year-old monk Dorgay (he is commonly called Dorgay
only), from Shabten Monastery in Dickyi, Nagchu County, Nagchu Prefecture, Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR), since 6 July 2011.
According to the information received, on 6 July
2011, Dorgay tied
white scarves, among other locations, on trees and electric poles in the Nagchu
region to celebrate the Dalai Lama's 76th birthday. Soon after
returning to the Shabten Monastery, the Nagchu county police arrived and
reportedly inquired about the white scarves. Dorgay was subsequently arrested
and taken by the police to an unknown location. His family and the monks of the
Shabten Monastery have reportedly tried to locate him but to no avail. 
The International Secretariat of OMCT is
gravely concerned about the safety of monk Dorgay, as his whereabouts and fate remain unknown.OMCT fears that he may be
subjected to torture or other ill-treatment. OMCT urges the competent
authorities to guarantee his physical and psychological integrity at all times,
in accordance with international human rights law, in particular the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment, and to immediately locate and
disclose his whereabouts. Enforced disappearance and torture and other
ill-treatment constitute serious human rights violations and are strictly
prohibited under international law. 
OMCT is also preoccupied with
regard to his arrest, as according to the information received, it seems solely
based on his peaceful political and religious beliefs and the exercise of his
rights to freedom of expression. Finally, OMCT urges the
authorities to conform with China’s international
human rights obligations, commitments that were reaffirmed on the occasion of
its election as a member of the United Nations Human Rights Council.  
Actions
Requested 
Please write to the
authorities in the People’s Republic of China urging them to:
i.                    
Immediately
locate and disclose the whereabouts of monk Dorgay; 
ii.                  
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, his physical and psychological integrity; 
iii.                 
Grant
monk Dorgay immediate and full access to a lawyer of his choice and his family,
as well as guarantee that he is examined by independent doctors and receives
adequate medical care if necessary, in accordance, inter alia, with the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of
Prisoners; 
iv.                
Order his immediate release in the absence of valid
legal charges that are
consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist,
bring him before an impartial, independent and competent tribunal and guarantee
his procedural rights at all times;
v.                  
Guarantee
the
respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
·  
   Mr. Wen
Jiabao, Prime Minister of the People’s Republic of China, Guojia Zongli, The
State Council General Office, 2 Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017,
People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 65961109 (c/o
Ministry of Foreign Affairs)
·  
   Mr. Wu Aiying, Minister of Justice of the
People’s Republic of China, Buzhang Sifabu, 10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie,
Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6529
2345, minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cn
·  
   Mr. Meng Jianzhu,
Minister of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang,
Gong’anbu, 14 Dongchang’anjie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100741, People’s
Republic of China, Fax: +86 10
63099216
·      Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China, Ch. De Surville, CP 85, 1213
Petit-Lancy 2, Suisse, e-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int, Fax : +41 22 793 70
14
Please also write to the embassies of the People’s Republic of China in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 22 July 2011
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 