Sierra Leone:  Continuing judicial harassment against members of the Malen Land Owners and Users Association (MALOA)
October 16, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Sierra Leone / 2015 / OctoberSierra Leone: Continuing judicial harassment against members of the Malen Land Owners and Users Association (MALOA)


URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
New
information
SLE 001 / 0315 / OBS 023.1
Judicial
harassment / Arbitrary detention
Sierra
Leone
October
16, 2015
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Sierra Leone.
 
New
information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the continuing judicial
harassment against members of the Malen Land Owners and Users Association
(MALOA). For the past three years, MALOA has been monitoring and denouncing the
negative human rights impact of the activities of Socfin Agricultural Company
Sierra Leone Ltd (SAC) in Malen's district, in particular acts of land grabbing[1].
 
According
to the information received, the judicial harassment against members of MALOA
continues. On October 8, 2015, a court hearing in the trial against Mr. Shiaka
Sama, MALOA Spokesperson and Messrs. Sima Mattia, James Blango,
Lahai Sellu, Musa Sellu and Foday Musa on charges of
destruction of growing plants belonging to SAC”, “destruction of growing
plants”, “conspiracy” and “incitement”[2] for allegedly brushing palm oil plants belonging to SAC
took place. It was was adjourned to October 15, 2015 as the defense counsel was
absent.
 
On
September 8, 2015, seven other MALOA members, Ms. Amie Faba, Messrs. Idrisa
Fatorma, Mohamed Kebbie, Abu Kebbie, Morie Margai, Luseni
Tommy and Momoh Karimu, were arrested on charges of “writing down
names of people in the town without the knowledge of the chiefs”. Ms. Amie Faba
was responsible for the registration of MALOA members in the village, when she
was summoned before the town Chief, who asked her to hand in the list of names.
When she refused to do so, Ms. Amie Faba and six other MALOA members were then
arrested. Despite the fact that bail in Sierra Leone is free, the detainees
were asked to pay 100,000 Leones (approximately 20 Euros) each, before they can
be allowed bail. The seven MALOA members were released pending trial on
September 10, 2015, after paying a total of 350,000 Leones. 
 
Several
other MALOA members are also facing judicial harassment in a third criminal cases
(see background information). 
 
The
Observatory fears that the arrest of the seven MALOA members only aimed at
sanctioning their peaceful human rights activities. Therefore, the Observatory
calls upon the authorities of Sierra Leone to put an end to all acts of
harassment against them as well as against all human rights defenders in Sierra
Leone.
 
Background
information:
 
On
October 16, 2013, six members of MALOA, including its spokesperson, Mr. Shiaka
Sama, MALOA Spokesperson and Messrs. Sima Mattia, James Blango,
Lahai Sellu, Musa Sellu and Foday Musa were arrested on
charges of destruction of growing plants belonging to SAC”, “destruction of
growing plants”, “conspiracy” and “incitement”[3] for allegedly brushing palm oil plants belonging to SAC and
detained until October 24, 2013. Though the six denied all allegations and
despite the absence of evidence, in July 12, 2014, the case was referred to the
High Court. The six were then again detained overnight and released on a
400,000 Leones (approximately 80 Euros) bail. On October 30, 2014, the trial
before the High Court began and has been ongoing since then. 
 
Several
MALOA members also face judicial harassment in another criminal case. Sylvester
Kebbie and James Blango, together with nine MALOA supporters[4],
were arrested between January 28 and February 26, 2014, on charges of
“conspiracy, malicious damage”, “riotous conduct”, “destroying growing plants”,
“stoning” and “carrying offensive weapons”. Some of the activists spent more
than 30 days in detention before being taken to court. This followed an alleged
shooting incident at the Bamba village in Malen's district on January 14, 2015,
involving two SAC personnel. Sylvester Kebbie and James Blango deny having been
present on the scene. On March 24, 2015, the two were refused bail by the
Magistrates Court for the fourth time. It should be noted that the group does
not have proper legal representation as the lawyers who represent them in court
have been doing so on a voluntary and occasional basis. During this last
hearing, lawyers of the defendants walk out of the court room to protest
against the unfair treatment of their clients. On October 6, 2015, the eleven
MALOA members appeared again before the Magistrates Court. The court dismissed
three of the six charges against them, namely the charges of “conspiracy,
malicious damage”, “riotous conduct” and “stoning”. The sitting was adjourned
to October 27, 2015.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities of Sierra Leone and ask them to:
 
i.
Immediately drop all charges against Ms. Amie Faba , Messrs. Idrisa Fatorma,
Mohamed Kebbie, Abu Kebbie, Morie Margai, Luseni Tommy and Momoh Karimu, Shiaka
Sama, Sima Mattia, James Blango, Lahai Sellu, Musa Sellu, Foday Musa and
Sylvester Kebbie, and put an end to all forms of judicial harassment against
them and other MALOA members.
 
ii.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms.
Amie Faba , Messrs. Idrisa Fatorma, Mohamed Kebbie, Abu Kebbie, Morie Margai,
Luseni Tommy and Momoh Karimu, Shiaka Sama, Sima Mattia, James Blango, Lahai
Sellu, Musa Sellu, Foday Musa and Sylvester Kebbie, as well as of all human
rights defenders in Sierra Leone;
 
iii.
Put an end to all acts of harassment - including at the judicial level -
against MALOA members as well as against all human rights defenders in Sierra
Leone;
 
iv.
Conform in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General
Assembly, in particular:
 
-
article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually or in
association with others, to promote the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”,
-
and article 12.2 which provides that “the State shall take all necessary
measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone,
individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats,
retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 
v.
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
in accordance with international human rights instruments ratified by Sierra
Leone.
 
Addresses:
 
Mr. Ernest Bai Koroma,
     President of the Republic of Sierra Leone, State House, State Avenue,
     Tower Hill, Freetown, Sierra Leone, jkawusu-konte@statehouse.gov.sl, jaramenajara@yahoo.comMr. Alhaji Samuel Sam-Sumana,
     Vice President of the Republic of Sierra LeoneMr. Franklyn B. Kargbo,
     Attorney-General and Minister of JusticeMrs. Francess P. Alghali,
     Secretariat of Human Rights Commission of Sierra Leone, NEC Building, OAU
     Drive, Tower Hill, FreetownHer Excellency Ms. Yvette
     Stevens, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Sierra Leone to the United
     Nations Office and other international organizations in Geneva Chemin
     Louis-Dunant 15B (3rd Floor), 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 730 17
     40, email: mission@sierraleonegeneva.chH.E. Dr Christian
     S. KARGBO, Ambassador of the Republic of Sierra Leone to the Kingdom of
     Belgium and Head of Mission to the European Union, Embassy of the Republic
     of Sierra Leone avenue de Tervueren 4101150 Brussels, Belgium, Fax:
     02/771.11.80, email: sierraleoneembassy@brutele.be 
 
Please
also write to diplomatic representations of Sierra Leone in your respective
countries.
 
***
 
Paris-Geneva,
October 16, 2015
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of human
rights defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.
 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
 
• Email:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org
• Tel
and fax FIDH: +33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / 01 43 55 18 80
• Tel
and fax OMCT: + 41 22 809 49 39 / 41 22 809 49 29



[1]    In March 2011, Socfin Agricultural Company
(SL) Ltd (SAC), subsidiary of Belgian-based Socfin group, leased more than
6,000 Ha of palm oil plantation in the district of Malen for a minimum of 50
years.


[2]    Only MALOA's spokesperson Shiaka Sama is
facing incitement charges.


[3]    Only MALOA's spokesperson Shiaka Sama is facing
incitement charges.


[4]    The nine are Messrs. Ibrahim Sengeh, Sumaila
Murana, Ishmael Bockarie, Abu Moiwo, Sao Rogers, Vandy
Sumaila, Foday Setua, Foday Mansaray and Mustapha Sengeh. 