Syrian Arab Republic:  Continuing incommunicado detention of Mr. Issam Zaghloul
October 19, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2011 / OctoberSyrian Arab Republic: Continuing incommunicado detention of Mr. Issam Zaghloul

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
SYR
013 / 1011 / OBS 117
Incommunicado detention / 
Fear for physical integrity
Syria
October 19, 2011
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Syria.
 
Description of the situation :
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the continuing incommunicado detention of Mr. Issam Zaghloul, a lawyer who has denounced
the deadly repression of the peaceful protest movement in Syria and the
repression of lawyers.
 
According to the information received, in the night of
August 23, 2011, Mr. Issam Zaghloul was arbitrarily arrested by members of the
Air Force Intelligence Services at his home in Darya,  Damascus. This arrest followed the participation of Mr. Issam
Zaghloul in a silent sit-in of lawyers organised on the same day in front of
the Syrian Bar Association to denounce its silence with respect to the deadly
repression of the peaceful protest movement and the arrest of numerous lawyers
in Syria since March 2011. Mr. Zaghloul also participated in various actions
aimed at denouncing the repression.
 
Mr. Zaghloul has been detained incommunicado for
nearly two months in the headquarters of the Air Force Intelligence Services in
Damascus without access to his lawyer and family. No information has been given
by the authorities about his condition nor the existence of charges against
him. According to reliable sources, the health of Mr. Zaghloul would have
seriously deteriorated over the past weeks. In addition, in the context of a
widespread resort to torture and ill-treatment against activists, the
Observatory seriously fears for the moral and physical integrity of Mr. Issam
Zaghloul.
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the continued
incommunicado detention of Mr. Zaghloul, as this
measure seems to merely aim at punishing him for his human rights activities,
and urges the authorities to release him immediately and unconditionally.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the Syrian authorities urging them to:

 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the
physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Issam Zaghloul;
 
ii. Release immediately and
unconditionally Mr. Issam Zaghloul;
 
iii. Put an end to any kind
of harassment – including at the judicial level – against Mr. Issam Zaghloul as
well as against all other individuals who monitor human rights violations;
 
iv. Conform with the provisions of the
UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of
the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially: 
- its Article 1, which
states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, 
- its Article 6 (b) and
(c), which states that “Everyone has the right, individually and in association
with others […] as provided for in human rights and other applicable
international instruments, freely to publish, impart or disseminate to others
views, information and knowledge on all human rights and fundamental freedoms
and [...] to study, discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in
law and in practice, of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through
these and other appropriate means, to draw public attention to those matters”.
- and its Article 12.2,
which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
present Declaration”;
 
v. Ensure in all circumstances respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international
human rights standards and international instruments ratified by the Syrian
Arab Republic.
 
Addresses :
 
· President, His Excellency Bashar al-Assad, Presidential Palace, al
Rashid Street, Damascus, Syria Arab Republic, Fax: +963 11 332 3410
· Minister of Defence, His Excellency General, Ali Habib Mahmud, Ministry
of Defence, O mayyad Square, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, Fax: +963 11 223
7842 
· Minister of Justice, His Excellency Mr. Tayzeer Qala Awwad, Damascus,
Syrian Arab Republic, Fax: +963 11 666 2460 
· Minister of Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Wallid Mu’allim, Ministry
of Foreign Affairs, al-Rashid Street, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, Fax: +963
11 332 7620 
· Ambassador Bashar Ja'afari, Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic to UN in Geneva, 72 rue
de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 42 75, Email: mission.syria@ties.itu.int
· Embassy the Syrian Arab Republic in Brussels, 1 avenue F.D. Roosevelt,
1050 Brussels, Belgium, Tel: +32 2 554 19 22; Fax: +32 2 648 14 85 
 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy
of the Syrian Arabic Republic in your respective country. 
 
*** 
Paris-Geneva, October 19, 2011
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·        
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25
18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
Tel and fax OMCT +
     41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29 