Azerbaijan:  Sport For Rights: Joint Letter to Lady Gaga regarding the opening Ceremony of the Baku Games
June 18, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Azerbaijan / 2015 / JuneAzerbaijan: Sport For Rights: Joint Letter to Lady Gaga regarding the opening Ceremony of the Baku GamesAzerbaijan_2015.06.18_SFR_Lady_Gaga_EN3 pages / 84 KB​​​Sport
 for Rights' campaign, of which OMCT is member, has been established to 
raise the problem of political prisoners in the context of the 
forthcoming international sporting events to be hosted by Azerbaijan. 

18 June 2015
Dear Lady Gaga,
We are writing to you as members of the Sport
for Rights campaign, which has been working to raise human rights violations in
Azerbaijan in the context of the European Games. We are deeply disappointed by
your decision to perform at the opening ceremony of the games amidst the worst
human rights crackdown to date in Azerbaijan, and ask you to consider our
appeal to help right this very public wrong.
Given your history of speaking out strongly for
human rights and equality, we can only assume that you are not aware of the
real situation in Azerbaijan. In the run-up to the games, the Azerbaijani
authorities worked aggressively to silence all forms of criticism and dissent, resulting
in the arrests of dozens of political prisoners. As written by jailed
Azerbaijani journalist Khadija Ismayilova in a letter smuggled out of prison
just last week, “Azerbaijan is in the midst of a human rights crisis. Things
have never been worse”. 
The Azerbaijani regime has been using the European
Games in an attempt to whitewash its image, to distract international attention
from the human rights abuses taking place in the country. Sadly, your
performance has become part of that cover-up, a spectacular piece of propaganda
for an authoritarian regime that is increasingly hostile towards its own
people.
But we believe that you still have the chance to
make this right. We urge you to follow the lead of U2 frontman Bono, who made
an impassioned appeal on behalf of our jailed Azerbaijani colleagues on 12 and
13 June on stage during his concerts in Montreal. We ask you to speak out
publicly, condemning the human rights crackdown in Azerbaijan, and calling for
the release of the country’s jailed journalists and human rights defenders. We
have provided a list in the appendix. 
You could go even further in demonstrating that
you are serious about the rights you so often promote by donating the money you
have earned for your Baku performance to the families of Azerbaijan’s political
prisoners. They are seriously struggling, having lost not only the freedom of their
loved ones to a cruel political game, but having also lost vital income in a
country still rife with poverty, despite the authorities’ attempts to cover it
up. We believe it is wrong that you have profited while it is our jailed friends
and colleagues who are paying the true price of the European Games. 
Please, have some compassion for our colleagues,
imprisoned for doing nothing more than speaking the truth and trying to change
the situation in Azerbaijan for the better. Show the world that you do care,
and that your silence cannot be bought.
Sincerely yours,
Emin Milli, former political prisoner
Thomas
Hughes, Executive Director, ARTICLE 19
Robert
Hårdh, Executive Director, Civil Rights Defenders
Nina
Ognianova, Europe and Central Asia Program Coordinator, Committee to Protect
Journalists
Maran Turner,
Executive Director, Freedom Now
Jodie Ginsberg,
Chief Executive Officer, Index on Censorship
Karim
Lahidji, President, International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), within
the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
Petra
Havlikova, Project Coordinator of the Women’s Rights Are Human Rights Program, NESEHNUTI
Bjørn Engesland, Secretary General, Norwegian
Helsinki Committee
Karin
Karlekar, Director, Free Expression Program, PEN American Centre
Ivana
Skalova, Head of the Eastern European Program, Center for Human Rights and
Democracy, People In Need
Emma
Hughes, Strategy Director, Platform 
Joanna
Furmaga, Chairperson, Polish Green Network
Gerald
Staberock, Secretary General, World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within
the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
APPENDIX: LIST OF JAILED JOURNALISTS AND HUMAN
RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Jailed
journalists:
1.     
Nijat Aliyev – editor-in-chief of the
website azadxeber.az, serving a 10-year prison sentence on spurious charges of
drug possession and the illegal import and sale of religious literature.
2.     
Araz Guliyev – editor of the website
xeber44.com, serving an eight-year prison sentence on spurious charges of
illegal possession of weapons, inciting hatred, and offensive action against
the flag or emblem of Azerbaijan.
3.     
Parviz Hashimli – Bizim Yol newspaper reporter and editor of the moderator.az
website, serving an eight-year prison sentence on spurious charges of
organising the sale of weapons from Iran.
4.     
Seymur Hezi –Azadliq newspaper reporter and presenter of the Azerbaijan Hour satellite
television programme, serving a five-year prison sentence on spurious
hooliganism charges.
5.     
Khadija Ismayilova – Radio Free
Europe/Radio Liberty journalist detained on spurious charges of embezzlement,
illegal entrepreneurship, tax evasion, abuse of power, and inciting someone to
attempt suicide.
6.     
Hilal Mammadov – editor-in-chief of Tolishi Sedo newspaper, serving a
five-year prison sentence on spurious charges of drug possession, treason, and
inciting hatred.
7.     
Rauf Mirkadirov – Zerkalo newspaper columnist, detained on spurious treason charges,
awaiting trial.
8.     
Tofig Yagublu – Yenu Musavat newspaper columnist, serving a five-year prison
sentence on spurious charges of organising mass riots and using violence
against police officers.
Jailed
human rights defenders:
1.     
Intigam Aliyev – human rights
lawyer and Chairman of the Legal Education Society, serving a 7.5-year prison
sentence on spurious charges of tax evasion, illegal entrepreneurship, and
abuse of power.
2.     
Rasul Jafarov – Chairman of
the Human Rights Club, serving a 6.5-year prison sentence on spurious charges
of tax evasion, illegal entrepreneurship, and abuse of power.
3.     
Anar Mammadli – Chairman of
the Election Monitoring and Democracy Studies Centre, serving a 5.5-year prison
sentence on spurious charges of tax evasion, illegal entrepreneurship, and
abuse of power.
4.     
Arif Yunus – historian and
academic, detained on spurious charges of treason and fraud, awaiting trial.
5.     
Leyla Yunus – Director of
the Institute for Peace and Democracy, detained on spurious charges of treason,
fraud, forgery, tax evasion, and illegal entrepreneurship, awaiting trial. 