Cambodia:  Ongoing judicial harassment of land rights activist Ms. Tep Vanny
January 27, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2017 / JanuaryCambodia: Ongoing judicial harassment of land rights activist Ms. Tep Vanny
New information
KHM 002 / 0816 / OBS 077.1
Arbitrary
detention / 
Judicial
harassment
Cambodia
January 27, 2017

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
partnership of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, has
received new information and requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Cambodia.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources of the ongoing
judicial harassment of land rights activist Ms.
Tep Vanny, who has been in pre-trial
detention since August 2016 in relation to a protest in March 2013.

According to the
information received, on January 25, 2017, Supreme
Court Judge Kim Sathavy announced that Ms. Tep Vanny’s second appeal for bail
had been denied, following a 45-minute hearing conducted by the Judge on
January 18, 2017. Ms. Tep Vanny’s trial before Phnom Penh Municipal Court is
due to be held on February 3, 2017. The Court of Appeals had previously denied
Ms. Vanny’s request for bail on November 17, 2016.
 
The Observatory
recalls that Ms. Tep Vanny is being detained on
charges of “intentional violence with aggravating circumstances” (Article 218 of the Criminal Code) for
participating in a protest held by members of the Boeung Kak Lake community in March
2013 in front of Prime Minister Hun Sen’s house in Phnom Penh. This case is
just one of three cases which were re-activated in August 2016 while Ms. Tep
Vanny was awaiting trial on separate charges stemming from her participation in
a peaceful ‘Black Monday’ protest (see background information). If found guilty, Ms. Tep Vanny could face two to five years in prison.
 
The Observatory strongly condemns Ms. Tep Vanny’s ongoing arbitrary detention,
which only aims at sanctioning her legitimate human rights activities, and
calls upon the Cambodian authorities to immediately
and unconditionally release her. The Observatory further
recalls that under Cambodia’s Code of Criminal Procedure, pre-trial
detention can only be ordered in “exceptional” circumstances.
 
Until
all charges are dropped against Ms. Tep Vanny,
the Observatory urges the Cambodian authorities to ensure that all judicial
proceedings against her are conducted in full compliance with her right to a
fair trial, as provided for under international law.
 
Background information:
 
On
August 15, 2016, Ms. Tep Vanny and Ms.
Bov Sophea, another Boeung Kak Lake activist, were arrested while participating in a peaceful protest held by
the Boeung Kak Lake community in Phnom Penh to mark the 15th week of
the ‘Black Monday’ campaign. The campaign involves weekly peaceful protests,
held on Mondays, where participants wear black clothing to call for the release
of human rights defenders Messrs. Ny
Sokha, Yi Soksan, Nay Vanda, Ny Chakrya and Ms. Lim Mony,
as well as for justice for the murder of prominent political analyst and ‘Black
Monday’ supporter Kem Ley[1].
 
Following their arrest, Ms. Tep Vanny and Ms. Bov
Sophea were initially detained at the Daun Penh district
police station before being sent to pre-trial detention in Prey Sar’s
Correctional Centre 2 (CC2) prison in Phnom Penh on August 17.
 
On August 17, 2016, both were charged with “incitement” under Article 495 of Cambodia’s Criminal Code, after a day of
interrogation at the Phnom Penh Municipal Court. They were immediately sent to
trial, which was adjourned until August 22.
 
On
August 22, following a 90-minute trial and after just 18 minutes of
deliberation, presiding Judge Pech Vicheator unexpectedly changed the charge to
“insult of a public official” (Article 502 of the Criminal Code) during the
delivery of his verdict. After presenting a defence against the original charge
of incitement, the defendants’ lawyers were given no opportunity to prepare a
defence against the new charge. The two
activists were convicted of “insulting a public official” and sentenced
to six days in prison.
 
While
Ms. Bov Sophea was released on the evening of August 22 after having serving
six days in detention, Ms. Tep Vanny was transported to CC2 prison, due to an
additional charge against her. On August 19, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court had
charged her with “intentional violence with aggravating circumstances”. The
charge stemmed from Ms. Tep Vanny’s participation in a protest near Prime
Minister Hun Sen’s house in March 2013 to call for the release of then-jailed
activist Ms. Yorm Bopha[2]. The protest turned violent when State security forces beat
10 of the activists and pushed others into police trucks.
 
On September 19, 2016,
Presiding Judge Ly Sokleng sentenced Ms. Tep Vanny and three other Boeung Kak Lake community members, Ms. Bo Chhorvy, Ms.
Kong
Chantha, and Ms.
Heng
Mom, to six months’ imprisonment after a
three-hour hearing at the Phnom Penh Municipal Court. The four land rights
activists were found guilty of “obstruction of a public official with
aggravating circumstances” and “insult” relating to a November 2011 protest that
turned violent when police and security guards were sent in to disperse demonstrators[3]. Ms. Tep Vanny was sent back to pre-trial detention in
CC2 prison due to her separate charges stemming from her participation in the
2013 protest. Ms. Bo Chhorvy, Ms. Kong Chantha, and Ms. Heng Mom, who was tried
in absentia, were not arrested as their sentence will not be enforced until all
appeals are exhausted.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Cambodia asking them to:
 
i. Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Tep Vanny,
as well as of Messrs. Ny Sokha, Nay Vanda, Yi Soksan,
Ny Chakrya, Ms. Lim Mony, Ms. Bo Chhorvy, Ms.
Kong Chantha, and Ms.
Heng Mom, and
of all human rights defenders in Cambodia;
 
ii. Immediately
and unconditionally release Ms. Tep Vanny and Ms. Lim Mony, Messrs. Ny Sokha, Nay Vanda,
Yi Soksan, and Ny Chakrya as their arbitrary
detention is merely aimed at sanctioning their legitimate human rights
activities;
 
iii. Put an end to all acts of harassment - including at the judicial level -
against Ms. Tep Vanny, Ms. Bov
Sophea, Ms. Bo Chhorvy, Ms. Kong Chantha, Ms.
Heng Mom, Ms. Lim
Mony and Messrs. Ny Sokha,
Nay Vanda, Yi Soksan, and Ny Chakrya, as well as
against all human rights defenders in Cambodia so that they are able to carry
out their work without hindrance or fear of reprisals;
 
iv. Comply
with all the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in
particular with its Articles 1, 5(b), and 12.2;
 
v. More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and with international human rights instruments
ratified by Cambodia.
 
Addresses:
 
·      
Mr. Hun Sen, Prime
Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 360666 / 855 23 880624 (c/o
Council of Ministers), Email: leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh
/ cppparty@gmail.com
·      
Mr. Sar Kheng, Minister
of Interior and Deputy Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: + 855 23
212708
·      
Mr. Ang Vong Vathna,
Minister of Justice of the Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: + 855 23 364 119
·      
Mr. Prak Sokhon,
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: + 855 23 216 144 /
855 23 216 141, Email: mfaic@mfa.gov.kh
·      
Mr. Sok An, Deputy
Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia, Fax: +855 23 882 065, Email: leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh
/ info@pressocm.gov.kh
·      
Mr. Keo Remy, President
of the Cambodian Human Rights Committee, Fax: +855 12 81 37 81 / +855 23 21 11
62 or +855 23 88 10 45 (c/o Council of Ministers)
·      
Mr. Bun Hun, President
of the Cambodian Bar Association, Fax: +855 23 864 076, Email: info@bakc.org.kh
·      
Ambassador Mr. Ney
Samol, Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Cambodia to the United Nations in
Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: + 41 22 788 77 74, Email: camemb.gva@mfa.gov.kh
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Cambodia in your respective
countries.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, January 27, 2017
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this
programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.  



[1] Boeung Kak Lake community in Phnom Penh is one of the co-implementing
partners of the campaign #FreeThe5KH, launched on August 8, 2016, by civil
society groups in support of the five human rights defenders who are currently
in pre-trial detention and under judicial investigation for allegations of bribery,
and who have now spent over 100 days in
prison. For more information, see www.freethe5kh.net as well as Joint
Press Releases, issued on July 13, 2016 and January 21, 2017.


[2] For more information, see Observatory
Press Release, issued on September 4, 2013.


[3] During the 2011 protest, the activists were
demanding that 94 Boeung Kak Lake families be included in a land plot that
Prime Minister Hun Sen had promised to set aside for displaced members of the
community. Violence broke out when police blocked about
100 women from walking towards
Monivong Boulevard.



​ 