Launch of 10 Days of Activism Against Torture and Ill-treatment
November 30, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2013 / NovemberLaunch of 10 Days of Activism Against Torture and Ill-treatment
PRESS RELEASE
Launch of 10 Days of Activism Against Torture and Ill-treatment
1st to the 10th of December 2013
Geneva, 29th
November 2013. On the occasion of the Human Rights Day, the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), the principal global civil society coalition against
torture, is launching its Campaign “10 days of activism against torture and
ill-treatment” together with members of its network “SOS Torture” to call for
public support against torture. 
Torture and ill-treatment continue to occur all over
the world and can take many features. It can be inflicted in the name of
national security or counter-terrorism, in the fight against organised crime or
drug cartels or to repress social protests. But in the large majority of cases
it is used against persons detained on ordinary criminal charges, notably to
extract confession or obtain information, and disproportionally on those
belonging to minorities, marginal groups or the poor. These human rights
violations remain too often unpunished. 
“Torture and
ill-treatment are egregious acts and a negation of the core of human dignity
itself”, said Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of OMCT. “But let’s not be mistaken - torture and impunity
have repercussions far beyond the individual violation. They corrupt the state
apparatus, the rule of law and democracy. Nobody should remain indifferent before this barbaric practice”,
he added. 
Human rights defenders are the voice of those who are
deprived of it because they are victims of torture and ill- treatment. OMCT has
been supporting the fight of torture victims and of human rights defenders over
the years. 
In the framework of its global campaign “Nothing can
justify torture under any circumstances”, OMCT invites the public to discover
from the 1st to the 10th of December ten videos of human
rights defenders speaking out against torture and ill-treatment. Each day, one
video will feature one human rights defender responding to one question in
relation to the practice of torture and ill-treatment. 
In parallel, member organisations in Kenya, Lebanon,
Malaysia and Pakistan will hold events in order to remind States of their
obligations to respect and guarantee the absolute prohibition of torture and
ill-treatment, to create awareness among vulnerable groups of citizens on
torture in order to empower them on how best to seek redress and also to mobilise
the public at large against such practices that cannot be justified under any
circumstances. 
“Each and everyone of us has the possibility
to take a stand against torture and ill-treatment. We invite people around the
world to discover the ten videos against torture and impunity on OMCT’s website
(www.omct.org) and social medias”, added Gerald Staberock. ‘These videos are a powerful reminder, that
it is the courage of defenders working often amidst serious threats, assembled
in the network of the OMCT, that makes a difference in the global fight against
torture”, he concluded.
This global public campaign forms part of an OMCT’s
project seeking the effective implementation of the UN Convention Against
Torture and anti-torture reforms with the financial support of the European
Commission and the Oak Foundation. 
Contact:
OMCT +41(0) 22 809 49 39, omct@omct.org
For further information visit: www.omct.org and Facebook OMCT Genève 