Kyrgyzstan:  Kyrgystan: Smear campaign against the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR) and its Chairman Mr. Ramazan Dyryldaev.
November 11, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2002 / NovemberKyrgyzstan: Kyrgystan: Smear campaign against the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR) and its Chairman Mr. Ramazan Dyryldaev.Paris-Geneva, 8th November 2002  Mr. Askar AKAYEV,  The International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation against Torture (OMCT), in the framework of their joint programme, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, are extremely worried by recent acts of harassment against the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR) and its Chairman Mr. Ramazan Dyryldaev.  According to the information received, an article was published on October 18th by the pro-governmental newspaper Erkin Too that strongly attacked Mr. Ramazan Dyryldaev accusing him of “serving his personal interests and sick ambitions and harming the country”. According to the information published in the article Mr. Ramazan Dyryldaev “is connected to loud scandals, and his unscrupulous attitude towards the grant funds is well known”. He is also accused of being the “main organizer of illegal activities that provoke public unrest, mass fights, demonstrations and marches”. The article mentions several western donors which support the organization and asked them  implicitly to stop financing KCHR.  It also urges the Ministry of Justice to cancel the legal registration of KCHR.  The Observatory strongly condemns these defamation remarks aimed at discrediting the work undertaken by the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR). The fact that the authors of the article remain unidentified adds to the belief that this article is part of an organized strategy to silence an organisation which actuates in a legal way for the promotion of democratic values, respect of human rights and fight against impunity. The Observatory is also very worried by the recent confiscation, on October 31st, of the property of the KCHR upon decision of the Pervomay District Court of Bishkek dated June 28th. This decision was taken as a refusal of the appeal lodged by Counterpart Consortium (USA), the real owner of KCHR property, against the decision of the Court to confiscate KCHR’s property in February 2002. Moreover, following the seal of their Bishkek-based office in March 2002 by the authorities, the KCHR had to find another office, which is now much more expensive.  The Observatory recalls that the KCHR and its President have been the subject of continuous acts of harassment and judicial persecutions in the past. The Observatory insists on the fact that Ramazan Dyryldaev, as well as his relatives, are currently subjected to a narrow surveillance, and his telephone is tapped.These acts constitute a flagrant obstacle to the rights of human rights defenders guaranteed by the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, according to which, in particular “every person has the right, individually or collectively, to promote the protection and fulfilment of human rights and fundamental liberties at the national and international level.” (article 1) and “everyone has the right, individually or in association with others, to solicit receive and utilize resources for the express purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms through peaceful means.”(article 13).  The Observatory recalls that Mrs. Hina Jilani, Special Representative of the UN Secretary General on Human Rights Defenders, expressed concerns in her report on Kyrgyzstan, following a visit she made to this country from 30 July to 4 August 2001, about the fact that “the right to denounce and protest human rights violations has been repressed […] and that freedom of assembly and freedom of association, though guaranteed by the Constitution, are frequently violated in practice”.  The Observatory urges Kyrgyz’s highest authorities to:  i.	Put an end to the harassment and the smear campaign directed at Mr. Ramazan Dyryldaev, and the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights and ensure that they be allowed to carry out their work without obstacles.	 ii.	Ensure the implementation of the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN general Assembly on December 9th, 1998 in particular under article 1, mentioned above, as well as its article 12.1 which stipulates that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to participate in peaceful activities against violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms”; iii.	Guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other international instruments ratified by the Kyrgyz Republic.  We thank you for your careful consideration in this matter.  Sincerely yours,  Sidiki KABA, President of the FIDH  Eric SOTTAS, Director of the OMCT 