Open Letter to Presidents of Latin America and the Caribbean about the Escazú Agreement
August 30, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / 2018 / AugustOpen Letter to Presidents of Latin America and the Caribbean about the Escazú AgreementAmericas_2018.08.30_Escazu Agreement OL4 pages / 314 KB​Dear Presidents,
On 27 September 2018, countries in Latin America and the Caribbean 
will have the opportunity to put in place a new instrument to protect 
the environment: The Regional Agreement on Access to Information, Public
 Participation and Access to Justice on Environmental Matters in Latin 
America and the Caribbean (the Escazú Agreement).
Your governments can make history and become leaders in environmental
 protection by signing the agreement during the opening for signature 
ceremony which will be held in the context of the Annual General Debate 
of the United Nations General Assembly in New York.
The Escazú Agreement is a key tool that will allow for a more 
participatory approach to decision-making, policymaking and projects 
relating to the environment and decreasing and mitigating conflicts 
driven by a lack of effective participation of affected communities. The
 Agreement delves into the human rights obligations that the countries 
in the region previously acquired through other international 
instruments with regard to the right of access to public information; 
participation in decision-making, including the adoption of inclusive, 
participatory and representative decisions at all levels; the right to a
 healthy environment; equal access to justice with regard to 
environmental rights; and the protection of human and environmental 
rights defenders, among others.
These obligations acquired by the countries of Latin America and the 
Caribbean, together with the commitments made within the framework of 
the Sustainable Development Goals and other international agreements, 
reflect a commitment to environmentally friendly development that 
respect human rights and future generations.
In addition, at the 48th General Assembly of the Organization of 
American States (OAS) in June this year, your governments welcomed the 
signing of the Escazú Agreement with the acknowledgment that the human 
person is the central subject of sustainable development and should be 
an active participant in this. You also acknowledged that the Agreement 
is a means to guarantee a safe environment in which individuals, groups 
and organizations that promote and defend human rights related to the 
environment can act without facing threats, restrictions, attacks or 
danger.
Signing the Escazú Agreement is the first step required to include 
environmental access rights into the government agenda. It represents a 
historic opportunity for your governments to send a clear message to 
your citizens and the international community regarding your firm 
commitment to this global agenda for the protection of human rights 
associated with a healthy and sustainable environment. A global agenda 
that will benefit everyone in the region and around the world.
We call on your governments to sign the Escazú Agreement on 27 
September 2018 and submit it to the competent national bodies for its 
immediate ratification. Now is the time to deliver real steps for real 
change. Latin America and the Caribbean need you to make the promise of 
the Escazú Agreement a reality for millions of people in the region. We 
also urge your governments to adopt rapid and effective measures to 
implement the provisions of the Agreement.
Yours sincerely,
200+ organizations across the region working on a diverse range of 
issues, including environmental protection, human rights, democracy, 
development and governanceThe letter is available here: Americas_2018.08.30_Escazu Agreement OL 