Zimbabwe:  Press Release: Human rights defenders at risk as elections approach
July 27, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Zimbabwe / 2018 / JulyZimbabwe: Press Release: Human rights defenders at risk as elections approach​

















PRESS
RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY
 Zimbabwe: Human rights defenders at
risk as elections approach
 
Preliminary findings of a field
mission
 
Paris,
Geneva, Harare, July 27, 2018 – Ahead of Zimbabwe’s much anticipated general
elections scheduled on July 30, the Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders* (an FIDH-OCMT partnership) releases
preliminary findings resulting from its most recent field mission conducted
from July 9 to 13, 2018, in Zimbabwe, to assess the environment in which human
rights defenders have been operating during the electoral campaign, in a
context of increased intra-party violence and succession battles. The
Observatory expresses serious concerns on the climate of fear and uncertainty
which curtails national civic space and hinders the work of human rights
defenders during this crucial moment for the democratic life of the country.
 
After
37 years of authoritarian rule, that disintegrated the country into a failed
state, Zimbabweans will, for the first time, experience an election process
without Robert Mugabe, who was in power from the independence of the country in
1980 until his forced resignation on November 21, 2017 through a military
assisted change of government. 
 
Since
November 24, 2017, when Emmerson Mnangagwa was sworn in as President to lead
the remainder of Robert Mugabe’s term before the 2018 elections, national
authorities have stated their commitment to ensure that July 30 general
elections will be credible, free, fair and transparent. Despite the fact that
political space seems to have opened up since Robert Mugabe left power, civic
space and the exercise of fundamental freedoms have remained restricted by the
regime. Violently repressed under Robert Mugabe, human rights defenders and
civil society actors continue operating in a hostile environment under Emmerson
Mnangagwa. 
 
The
field mission documented that a number of repressive laws used under then
President Mugabe, including the Public Order and Security Act (POSA) and the
Access to Information and Protection of Privacy Act (AIPPA), are still used to
threaten and intimidate human rights defenders, and more broadly anyone seen as
opposed to ZANU-PF. 
 
“The current government is responsible
for ensuring 30 July elections are held in a conducive environment providing
peace, transparency and fairness for all Zimbabweans to go to polls free of
fear. The protection of human rights defenders over this period must also be a
priority to ensure that elections can be truly fair and participative. Acts of
intimidation and harassment reported against them must immediately stop”,
said Okay MACHISA, National Director of ZimRights.
 
Despite
Robert Mugabe's departure from power in November 2017 and Emmerson Mnangagwa's
communication strategy to reach out to the international community, old
repressive practices remain very much alive. Among other issues, the field
mission documented that ZANU-PF's still exercises firm control on the State;
Zimbabwe political life is characterised by inter and intra-party violence the
army is often deployed for law enforcement operations instead of the police. Currently, the
deployment of military forces in rural areas is denounced by civil society as a
strategy to intimidate populations.
 
 “The 30 July vote has to be the opportunity to definitely turn the page
on a system that has stifled Zimbabweans for nearly 40 years, and to initiate a
real democratic transition. This requires putting an end to malpractices, strengthening
the rule of law and protecting human rights for all.”, said Arnold TSUNGA, FIDH
Vice-President.
 
The field
mission could further observe that the Zimbabwean people have lost confidence
in the electoral process. The credibility and transparency of the process have
been so much damaged that there is a high risk for disputed election results.
As perpetrators of past human rights violations remain in power and military
staff keeps holding strategic senior positions within the government and
administration, the mission delegation expressed its fear that electoral disputes
may lead to violence and social unrest.
 
“SADC, the African Union and the European Union have all sent
electoral observer missions to Zimbabwe and must now accompany the country in
ensuring any dispute over election results are democratically addressed,
through peaceful and legal means, in accordance with SADC guidelines on
Elections, the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance and
international standards in this respect.”, concluded
Alice MOGWE, Secretary General of FIDH and Executive Director of DITSHWANELO –
the Botswana Centre for Human Rights.
 
Following
its mission, the Observatory wishes to highlight the following key issues.
 
Acts
of harrassment against and of intimidation of kuman rights defenders must be
investigated
 
While under Robert Mugabe dispensation human rights
defenders (HRDs) faced gross violations culminating in summary executions and
enforced disappearances, these abuses still persist in more subtle forms under
President Mnangagwa. 
 
Independent journalists and media practitioners have
historically been consistently repressed in Zimbabwe. Since November 2017,
cases of harassment and intimidation against journalists have relatively
reduced, however, as the elections approach, fears have re-surfaced over
threats to journalists. For instance, during a media briefing on the
preparation of the elections, held by the military on July 4, 2018, the  Director of Public Relations of the Zimbabwe
Defence Forces, Colonel Overson Mugwisi, singled out HRDS like Siphosami Malunga,
human rights lawyer based in South Africa, and journalists such as Richard
Chidza, Snodia Mawupeni and Blessing Mashaya for “bad and mischievous reporting”[1][2].
 
Draconian
laws used to suppress human rights defenders must be repealed
 
After
the fall of Mugabe, several repressive laws were not repealed nor amended.
Therefore, a number of old laws – some adopted prior to independence in 1980 –
are still used to persecute HRDs, activists and journalists, the most relevant
being the Public Order and Security Act of 2002 (POSA) and Access to
Information and Protection of Privacy Act of 2003 (AIPPA). 
 
The
former provides for the notification of the regulating authority of any
intentions to hold a meeting that is “of a political nature”. Since its
adoption, many human rights defenders have been arrested, detained and
prosecuted under its provisions.  The act
unreasonably and unjustifiably encroaches on the rights of individuals and
groups to exercise their rights to freedom of assembly and association. 
 
The
second Act requires accreditation of journalists by authorities. In previous
mission reports, the Observatory documented how licenses have been allegedly
selectively granted to pro-government journalists while denied to independent
journalists Moreover, AIPPA has been effectively used to silence the
independent media such as the privately-owned Daily News and the Daily News on
Sunday, which have now been closed. Journalists have experienced difficulties
in having their accreditation processed in terms of the requirements of the
Act. A number of journalists from the independent media have been arrested and
charged under AIPPA for offences such as the publication of falsehoods, and
failure to register or accredit under the politicised and non-professional body
of the Media and Information Commission under Robert Mugabe’s rule. This has
severely restricted the enjoyment of the right to freedom of expression and
freedom of the press.
 
A
discredited Zimbabwe Electoral Commission and an instrumentalisation of the
State apparatus by Zanu-PF created an imbalance and unequal electoral campaign 
 
Although the political and civil space has seemingly
opened up since November 2017, access to resources has been still very
imbalanced in favour of the ruling party. In a report by the Zimbabwe Elections
Support Network (ZESN), ZANU-PF has been accused of gaining an unfair advantage
over the opposition by using state resources such as vehicles, land, food aid
and state media[3]. The report also disclosed
that ZANU-PF used threats and violence to force people to attend rallies.
 
Furthermore,
state media is still biased towards ZANU-PF in terms of coverage. Only minor
opposition parties are covered in the media, while major opposition parties
have very little access to media coverage. In reaction to this limitation,
members of opposition parties have found ways around this through the increased
use of social media to organise campaigns, mobilise and conduct their advocacy
work e.g. via Twitter, Facebook,
Youtube, WhatsaApp and other online platforms. For instance, the #ThisFlag,
#Tajamuka and #OccupyAfricaUnitySquare were all successful online movements
initiated by HRDs.
 
Additionally,
members of ZANU-PF have been accused of appropriating school and church
buildings, furniture and vehicles for political rallies and campaigns, and
forcing teachers and school children to attend political meetings. The
Association of Rural Teachers Unions of Zimbabwe (ARTUZ) lodged an urgent
application, before the High Court of Zimbabwe,against ZANU-PF and the Ministey
of Primary and Secondary Education in June 2018 (the ‘Safe Schools’ case) detailing several specific incidents, including
where rallies were held on school grounds, teachers and children were forced to
attend rallies during school hours, benches and chairs were removed from
classrooms.[4]. On 28 June 2018, the High
Court delivered an order barring political parties from “asking, encouraging or
forcing children in schools from attending political rallies, forcing teachers
to attend rallies or to make financial contributions toward rallies, and using
school property for rallies including school grounds, buses, furniture, etc[5].
ZANU-PF appealed this order on flimsy grounds and continued to perpetrate the
violations prohibited by the court order. This forced ARTUZ to make another
urgent application to Masvingo High Court, on 11 July 2018, to ensure that ZANU
PF and the Minister of Primary and Secondary Education comply with the order
granted by the High Court, pending the appeal.[6] . ARTUZ was once again successful in court
but there are still reports of ZANU-PF continuing with these prohibited
actions.
 
The Zimbabwe Electoral Commission (ZEC), the
independent constitutional institution officially tasked to prepare for,
conduct and supervise the elections in Zimbabwe, has been accused, by civil
society organisations and activists, of failing to uphold its constitutional
mandate by ensuring that elections are free, fair, transparent and legal, for
several years. In the run-up to July 30, 2018 there appears to be a widespread
lack of confidence in ZEC once again. This is evidenced by the various court
cases, brought by members of opposition parties, currently pending before
courts and complaints from Zimbabwean civil society organisations against ZEC
on issues of transparency, accountability, release of the voters roll,
integrity of the voters roll, design, printing, security and transporting of
the ballot paper, the postal ballot process, collusion with ZANU-PF and the
military, credibility of the appointed chairperson and commissioners, fraud
etc.[7] .
 
According to June and July 2018 reports
from ZESN and Zimbabwe Solidarity Forum (ZSF)), the inordinate number of
indictments against ZEC significantly compromises the integrity of the upcoming
elections and presents a very high risk for the electoral malpractices and
irregularities of previous elections to be replayed, or at least raises a basis
for strong suspicion on the part of the contestants – mainly opposition parties
– in a way that poses a danger to a smooth electoral process taking place.
 
In spite of these apprehensions, it
appears that the elections will still be held on July 30, 2018, as provided for
under the Constitution. MDC Alliance organised a mass public protest on July
11, 2018 in Harare where people took to the streets chanting “No reform, no elections!” and marched to
the office of ZEC. During the protest, The leader of MDC Alliance, Mr. Nelson
Chamisa stated that the party will not boycott elections but will make sure the
elections are not held if ZEC fails to meet the party’s demands and
expectations of transparency and impartiality. Just a few days before July 30
elections, MDC Alliance claims they are at a “stalemate” with ZEC and intents
on shutting down Harare with another mass demonstration, requesting a mass
meeting with the political parties, civil society and the church and escalating
the matter to SADC by requesting an extraordinary summit.”[8] .
 
Among the last controversies, MDC Alliance
denounced that the advance vote of the police and the military on July 12, 2018
took place quietly, without the presence of representatives of the
different political parties, or even officials of ZEC. The latter later
reported that it had not been kept informed of the holding of this advance
vote. Only police officers in charge of monitoring the process were present.[9].
 
The military
is still considered as a potential threat to a peaceful and credible democratic
process
 
Since the
fall of Robert Mugabe, the country remains apprehensive about the military’s
continued involvement in government compounded by the already existing threat
of the conflation between the military and ZANU-PF. The military assisted
change of government, although generally accepted at the height of the
“Mugabe-must-go” movement, further confirmed public perception that the
military is intertwined with ZANU-PF. Much like his predecessor, President
Emmerson Mnangagwa has been criticised for seemingly consolidating his power by
awarding senior military generals who facilitated his rise to power with key
cabinet positions. For instance, retired Major General Sibusiso Moyo, who
announced the military takeover on state television was appointed Minister of
Foreign Affairs, long-serving Chief Air Marshall Perence Shiri is now Minister
of Agriculture, Lands and Rural Resettlement, and the Chief of the Army
Constantino Chiwenga was appointed Vice-President and Minister of the Defence
Force. 
 
The military
played a key role in cementing the Mugabe regime since 1980 but turned on him
on 14 November 2017 and installed Emmerson Mnangagwa as President. There are
therefore well-founded fears that if the outcome of the general elections is
not in favour of the ruling party instability would ensue. 
 
Since
November 2017 the military has replaced the police (ZRP) and the Central
Intelligence Organisation (CIO) as the main instrument of intimidation, fear
and perpetration of violence against opponents of ZANU-PF. There are reports by
Zimbabwe civil society organisations that between 2,000 and 5,000 members of the
military have been deployed to rural villages ahead of the elections, in order
to intimidate villagers and campaign for Mnangagwa and ZANU-PF. According to
reports from Zimbabwe Democracy Institute, these soldiers are deployed in the
villages to do government agricultural work or peace and security maintenance.
Some wear uniforms and others civilian clothing but are still identifiable. The
soldiers work closely with war veterans and traditional leaders to distribute
food aid and agricultural inputs to the villagers. According to the Zimbabwe
Democracy Institute (ZDI) report published on July 10, 2018, the main
observation was that this embedment of the military in rural villages is a form
of structured subtle intimidation by ZANU-PF to secure fear induced votes.[10]
 
Context:
 
In the coming months, the Observatory will publish a full report
detailing findings of the mission and addressing specific and targeted
recommendations on the situation of human rights defenders and of fundamental
freedoms in Zimbabwe.  This report will
include analysis and recommendations for upholding respect for fundamental
freedoms, respect of civic space for HRDs and ensuring the protection of HRDs.
 
The
mission delegation was composed of Arnold TSUNGA, FIDH Vice-President, Alice
MOGWE, FIDH Secretary General and Executive Director of DITSHWANELO – the
Botswana Centre for Human Rights, Jacob VAN GARDEREN, Director of Public
Interest Practice and Legal advisor at Lawyers for Human Rights - South Africa,
Thandeka CHAUKE, Candidate Attorney at Lawyers for Human Rights – South Africa.
It was accompanied by Okay Machisa, National Director of ZimRights.
 
Notably, the mission met
with:
- specific CSOs including:
Zimbabwe Christian Alliance, Elections Situation Room, Grace to Lead, Bulawayo
Progressive Residents Association, Youth for Innovation, Christian Legal
Society, Zimbabwe Human Rights Association, Women of Zimbabwe Arise, Bulawayo
Vendors and Traders Association, Bindura University, Shalom Projects, National
Association for Non-Governmental Association, Habakkuk Trust, Women’s Institute
for Leadership Development, Election Resources Centre and Counselling Services
Unit;
- representatives of political parties
including : ZANU-PF, MDC Youth Assembly, Peoples Rainbow Coalition, Mthwakazi
Republic Party;
- representatives of the national
Judiciary;
- representatives of international
partners and foreign diplomatic mission of representatives of the European
Union, the United Nations (Fiona Adolu), the Swedish embassy and the French
embassy.
 
For the past ten years, the Observatory has monitored
the situation of HRDs and civil society organisations operating in Zimbabwe,
and carried out several facts- finding and advocacy missions in the country.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
(the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to intervene to
prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. FIDH
and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.
 
Press contacts:
FIDH: Samuel Hanryon: +33 6 72 28 42 94 / Maryna Chebat: +33
6 48 05 91 57OMCT: Marta Gionco: +41 22 809 4939



[1]       See “Zimbabwean Army addresses Media
Briefing on Elections” posted by Zimbo Media on 4 July 2018: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UZO3YbiP1uU&feature=youtu.be&t=8m50s; see also “Safety
of journalists in question as poll date nears” article in the Daily Maverick
published on 11 July 2018: https://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2018-07-11-safety-of-journalists-in-question-as-poll-date-nears/ .


[2]       The army warning was
described as “ominous” and has been condemned by one of the HRDs, Mr. Siphosami
Malunga, as an unconstitutional and criminal attempt to stifle the right to
freedom of expression See “Why army warning is ominous” article by Siphosami
Malunga in the Standard published on 15 July 2018: https://www.thestandard.co.zw/2018/07/15/army-warning-omnious/ .


[3]       See ZESN Report on the
Pre-Election Environment and Observation of Key Electoral Processes: http://www.zesn.org.zw/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/ZESN-REPORT-ON-PRE-ELECTION-POLITICAL-ENVIRONMENT-AND-OBSERVATION-OF-KEY-ELECTORAL-PROCESSES.pdf.


[4]       See ARTUZ v ZANU-PF and the Minister of Primary and Secondary Education  (HC 263/18) 25 and 28 June 2018: http://veritaszim.net/node/2495; see also 2017 report by the Zimbabwe Human Rights Commission “
Investigative report on Participation of School Children at Political Rallies” http://www.zhrc.org.zw/download/teachers-unions-of-zimbabwe-vs-1-ministry-of-primary-and-secondary-education-2-zanu-pf/# 


[5]       See
statement on ARTUZ and Veritas’ litigation for safe schools:
https://bulawayo24.com/index-id-news-sc-press+release-byo-140196.html


[6]        See ARTUZ v ZANU-PF the Minister of Primary and
Secondary Education  (HC 297/18) 17
July 2018: http://veritaszim.net/node/2495.


[7]       See “Zimbabwe 2018 Elections:
BVR Analysis” report by Team Pachedu published on 16 July 2018: http://kubatana.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/mainreport.pdf; see also ZESN
Press Releave on Audit of 2018 Voters Roll dated 19 July 2018: http://www.zesn.org.zw/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/ZESN-Press-Release-on-Audit-of-the-2018-Voters-Roll.pdf 


[8]       Watch MDC Alliance media brief
by Mr. Nelson Chamisa on 17 July 2018 (from 11:48 – 17:25): https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dosq7WQ0RHY; see also “Nelson
Chamisa Threatens to take ZEC Headon over Printing of Ballot Papers” article by
VOA Africa published on 17 July 2018: https://www.voazimbabwe.com/a/nelson-chamisa-threatens-to-take-zec-headon-elections-zimbabwe/4486127.html 


[9]       Read the article « Uproar as police
votes clandestinely », The Independent Zimbabwe, 13 July 2018 : https://www.theindependent.co.zw/2018/07/13/uproar-as-police-vote-clandestinely/ 


[10]       See
report “Zanu-PF/Military Deterrence of the Village
Vote”:http://kubatana.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/zdi_zanupf_military_village_vote_180710.pdf 