Honduras:  Honduras: establishment of Commission to investigate systematic murder of street children
June 10, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / Honduras / 2002 / JuneHonduras: Honduras: establishment of Commission to investigate systematic murder of street childrenCHILD CONCERN Case HND 241001.2 CC Follow up to cases HND 241001.CC and HND 241001.1.CC Extra-judicial killing  Geneva, 10 June 2002  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Honduras.   Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by Casa Alianza, a member of the OMCT network, that children and young adults are still regularly murdered in Honduras, bringing the total to more than 1210 victims since January 1998. In response to international pressure, President Maduro has decreed the formation of a top level Commission to investigate the systematic murders of children in the country.  The decision to form a Commission was allegedly made at a cabinet meeting last week. The President named the Minister of the Interior (Gobernacion) to chair the Commission which includes the Minister of Justice, the National Commissioner of Human Rights and representatives of non-governmental organizations working for the well being of children. No date has been set for the first meeting of the Commission.  According to the information received, no killer has been identified in 66% of the cases. 18% of the killings were attributed to inter-gang violence; 4% to police and guards. The remaining of 12% of the killings were attributed to the now infamous “gray car” that roves around neighbourhoods murdering children with high-powered rifles.  The International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its deep concern about the aforementioned situation. OMCT specially wishes to draw attention to the fact that by ratifying the Convention on the rights of the child, Honduras has recognised that "every child has an inherent right to life" (Article 6).  OMCT deems that extrajudicial executions, even when the perpetrators are not identified, may invoke State responsibility for lack of due diligence. Due diligence imposes various positive measures that States Parties must adopt in conformity to international human rights standards, including the obligations to prevent, to stop, to investigate and to punish violations of human rights, as well as to provide adequate compensation and to promote recovery and reintegration of the victim.  OMCT welcomes the establishment of the Commission and it urges the Honduran Government to activate it without any delay and to effectively support its work by guaranteeing back-up, financial resources and transparency.   Background information  In October 2001, the International Secretariat of OMCT had been informed by Casa Alianza that more than one hundred and ten children and young adults had been murdered in Honduras since the August 2001 visit of Ms Asma Jahangir, the UN Special Rapporteur on extra-judicial, arbitrary or summary executions. According to statistics compiled by Casa Alianza, an average of more than 50 children and young adults under the age of 23 were being murdered in Honduras every month. More than half of the victims were between 16 and 17 years old, and more than 22% were 15 years old or younger.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities of Honduras urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the right to life, as well as the physical and psychological integrity of all children and young adults in Honduras, including those who live on the streets; ii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of the deaths in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iii.	guarantee respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national law, regional and international human rights standards, in particular the Convention on the Rights of the Child.  Addresses:  Ing. RICARDO MADURO JOEST, Presidente de la República de Honduras, Palacio Presidencial, Tegucigalpa, D.C., Honduras, Secretario Privado: Xavier Arguello, Teléfono: (504) 235-6843. Celular: (504) 978-2528 y (504) 978- 2529  Crnel (r) JUAN ANGEL ARIAS, Secretario de Estado en el Despacho de Seguridad Pública, Ministerio de Seguridad, Barrio Casamata, Tegucigalpa, D.C., Honduras , Teléfono: (504) 220-1712, Fax: (504) 220-1711  Abog. ROY EDMUNDO MEDINA, Fiscal General del Estado, Ministerio Público Col. Lomas del Guijarro, Tegucigalpa, D.C., Honduras, Teléfono: (504) 221-5670 y (504) 221-3099, E-mail: fiscal@edured.net  Lic. PORFIRIO LOBO SOSA, Presidente Congreso Nacional de Honduras, Palacio Legislativo, Tegucigalpa, D.C., Honduras, Teléfono: (504) 220-5337, E-mail: pepelobo01@hotmail.com  Please also write to the diplomatic representatives of Honduras in your country.  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.  Geneva, 10 June 2002 