Egypt:  State Council's report declared illegal the administrative closure order against El Nadeem Clinic
March 23, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2017 / MarchEgypt: State Council's report declared illegal the administrative closure order against El Nadeem Clinic

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

New information
EGY 001 / 0216 /
OBS 019.5
Harassment /
Restrictions to
freedom of association
Egypt
March 23, 2017
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, has
received new information and requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Egypt.
New information:
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about recent
developments on the administrative closure of El Nadeem Center for the
Rehabilitation for Victims of Violence and Torture (“El Nadeem Center”)[1],based in Cairo.
According to the information received, on March 18, 2017, the State Council issued
a report declaring illegal the February 17, 2016 administrative closure order
against El Nadeem Clinic, following a complaint filed on February 20, 2016 by El Nadeem staff before the
Administrative Court (see background information). The State Council commissioners
argued that that El Nadeem had never been informed of any breaches to the
license conditions, nor were they given a time to redress such alleged
breaches. 
It has to be noted that
the conclusions of the report are not binding and has been forwarded to the Administrative Court who has the discretion to take it into account or not
during the administrative proceedings. The first court session is scheduled on
April 19, 2017. 
Furthermore, at the time
of writing this appeal, there were still no developments regarding the second
complaint filed by El Nadeem staff with the Prosecution on February 9, 2017 on
the illegal closure of two other flats
occupied by El Nadeem Center, which were not included in the Ministry of Health
(MoH) closing order of February 2016 (see background information).
The Observatory recalls that this year has seen an unprecedented
harassment against El Nadeem Center,
with three closure attempts in less than a year, an attempt to freeze the
center’s assets, as well as a travel ban issued against its Director Ms.
Aida Seif El-Dawla[2]. 
The harassment campaign against the
anti-torture movement in Egypt comes at a time of
rising government pressure on independent human rights groups in Egypt, in the
context of a dramatic deterioration of the human rights situation in the
country, marked namely by a grave crackdown on civil society and a notable
increase in cases of torture, deaths in detention and enforced disappearances.
The
Observatory urges the Egyptian authorities to immediately and unconditionally
lift the closure order against El Nadeem Center as well as the travel ban
against Ms. Aida Seif El-Dawla.
Background information:
On February 17, 2016 at about 4 p.m. two police officers from the
Azbakeya District authority and one city employee ordered the employees of El
Nadeem Center to leave the center's premises. The three men delivered an
“administrative closure order” signed by the Director of the Health Ministry’s
Free Treatment Directorate and addressed to the head of the Azbakeya district
authority, referring to a violation of Law 453/1954[3].
The document ordered the closure of the center based on a decision signed on
February 8, 2016, “for breaching license conditions” (providing no further
information) stamped by the Cairo district on February 15. The implementation
of the order was postponed until February 22, 2016.
At the beginning of
February, the center was visited by an employee of the MoH, who came to inspect
the center based on an order given by phone from the MoH himself. The Minister
employee did not have any official papers nor an inspection warrant. The
employee of the Ministry ordered a copy of the center's license. No breaches of
regulations were noted.
On February 21, 2016, Ms. Aida Seif al-Dawla, Director of El
Nadeem Center and Dr. Suzan
Fayad, Founder of El Nadeem Center accompanied by their lawyer Ms. Maha Yucef and the head of the Cairo's doctor's
syndicate Dr. Sanaa Fuad,
held meetings with representatives of the Ministry of Health to discuss about
the “administrative closure order” issued against El Nadeem Center on February
17, 2016, for allegedly “breaching licence conditions”, without providing
further information. On February 20, 2016, El Nadeem Center's lawyer filed an
urgent motion to the Administrative Court of First Instance to suspend the
implementation of the closure order. Meanwhile, the implementation of the order
was postponed until February 22 upon El Nadeem Center's request pending
meetings at the MoH.
During the meetings, El Nadeem Center's representatives were informed
that the MoH had ordered the closure of El Nadeem Center for violating its
license, referring to the conduct of activities which did not fall within the
mandate for which El Nadeem Center had been licensed. Such activities include
the publication of torture reports, which according to the Ministry is not
linked with rehabilitation and is not a medical activity, and especially, the
publication in January 2016 of a review of “2015 in numbers” in the Egyptian
newspaper Al-Masry Al-youm, summarizing cases of deaths, torture
and medical neglect in detention in 2015 as well as cases of extra judicial
killings reported in the media. However, during the meetings, no professional
or medical breaches were identified with regards to El Nadeem Center's
activities.
El Nadeem Center's representatives requested a moratorium and the
suspension of the closure order pending an agreement on ways to disengage their
medical activities from their human rights advocacy activities. The request was
rejected.
On February 20, 2016, El Nadeem Center challenged the closure order
before the Administrative Court. The complaint included an urgent request to
delay implementation of the closure order until the Court has heard the appeal,
but that urgent request was not accepted.
In the afternoon of April 5, 2016, the Egyptian MoH sent a delegation to
El Nadeem Center to implement the “administrative closure order” and close the
Center. El Nadeem directors refused to comply and leave the premises, as the
MoH representatives did not present the original document of the closure order,
as required by law.
The MoH representatives decided to leave the premises but called the
Interior Ministry to request the intervention of police forces to enforce the
order.
On April 6, 2016, El
Nadeem Center sent another telegram to the Director in charge of
non-governmental treatment institutions and licences at the MoH stating that
the closing team did not have an official order with them, that the center was
not inspected for any violations and that they had not been informed of any
violations to correct. The memorandum requested, again, to suspend the closing
order and to form a medical inspection committee to inspect the clinic for any
professional breaches.
At the same time, El Nadeem Center’s staff was informed via the media
that the Azbakeya district Governorate had filed a complaint against them at
the Azbakeya police station for not allowing the closing team to execute the
closing order.
On November 10, 2016, El Nadeem Center was informed that their assets
had been frozen, for four days following a directive of the Central Bank of
Egypt (CBE). Several other NGOs have been allegedly subjected to the same
administrative measure. The reason given by the bank for the four day asset
freeze was that they had to comply with bank regulations and we had to submit a
document confirming that we were not registered with the ministry of social
solidarity. 
It has to be recalled that El Nadeem Center was not part of case
173/2011 (the “foreign funding case” against civil society), within which
framework on September 17, 2016, several human rights defenders and NGOs were
subjected to an asset freeze[2]. 
More recently, on February 9, 2017, at around 11 a.m., fifteen police
officers in civilian clothes closed and sealed with tape and red wax the doors
of the three flats occupied by El Nadeem. At the time, the premises were vacant
as the center is closed on Thursdays and Fridays.
The janitor, who was the only person present on the premises when the
police’s operation began, tried to oppose the closure and was threatened of
arrest by the police. Alerted by phone about the operation, Ms. Aida Seif
El-Dawla, Director and one of the founders of El
Nadeem Center, immediately arrived on the premises. She
was denied any explanations on the situation, and also threatened of arrest if
she kept asking questions. The janitor, accompanied by El
Nadeem Centre’s lawyer Mr. Taher Abulnasr,
was brought to the Azbakeya police station.
The Observatory fears that the police officers were implementing the
“administrative closing order” issued on February 17, 2016 by the Ministry of
Health (MoH) to shut down the center for allegedly “breaching license
conditions”. It has to be recalled that on that occasion the closing order only
mentioned El Nadeem Center clinic, which occupies only one of the three flats
that were sealed this morning[4].

El Nadeem Centre’s lawyers, Mr. Taher Abulnasr and Ms. Maha Yucef went
to the Azbakeya police station to file a complaint against the illegal closure
of the two company flats, which are not included in the MoH closing order of
February 2016, but have been prevented from doing so and had to file a
complaint with the prosecution instead
The Observatory recalls that in February 2016
El Nadeem Center filed a complaint before the administrative court to challenge
the February 17, 2016 administrative closing order. Since then, the judicial
process has been ongoing and the final court decision was expected to be made
public in February 2017. Therefore, the police did not wait for the court
ruling regarding the closure of the clinic, and in addition closed two
additional flats, outside the mandate of the MoH.
Actions requested:
Please write to the authorities of Egypt asking them to:
i. Immediately and unconditionally lift the closure order against El
Nadeem Center for Rehabilitation of Victims of Violence and Torture, and unseal
its premises to allow its staff to carry out their legitimate human rights
activities;
ii. Immediately and unconditionally lift the travel ban against
Ms. Aida Seif al-Dawla;
iii. Put an end to all forms of harassment against El Nadeem Center, as
well as against all human rights organisations and defenders in Egypt;
iv. Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, in particular with its Articles 1, 5(b) and 12.2;
v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Egypt.
Addresses:
·         President of the Arab Republic of
Egypt, H.E. Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, Fax: +202 2391 1441, Email:
p.spokesman@op.gov.eg, Twitter: @AlsisiOfficial
·         Prime Minister, Mr. Sherif Ismail. Fax: + 202 2735 6449 / 27958016. Email: primemin@idsc.gov.eg
·         Minister of the Interior, Mr. Magdi
Abdel-Ghaffar, E-mail: HumanRightsSector@moi.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2579 2031 / 2794
5529
·         Minister of Justice, Mr. Mohamed
Hossam Abdel-Rahim, Fax: +202 2795 8103
·         Minister of Social Solidarity, Ghada
Waly, Fax: +202 3337 5390
·         Public Prosecutor, Counsellor Nabeel
Sadek, Fax: +202 2577 4716
·         Mr. Mohamed Fayeq, President of the
National Council For Human Rights, Fax: + 202 25747497 / 25747670. Email:
nchr@nchr.org.eg
·         H.E. Ms. Wafaa Bassim, Ambassador,
Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations in Geneva, Email:
mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41 22 738 44 15
·         Embassy of Egypt in Brussels, Fax: +32
2 675.58.88; Email: embassy.egypt@skynet.be
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Egypt in
your respective country.
***
Geneva-Paris, March 23, 2017
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997
by FIDH and OMCT. The objective of this programme is to prevent or remedy
situations of repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are
both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union
Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
•       E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
•      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49
39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
•      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25
18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 



[1]                 El
Nadeem Center is an independent nongovernmental organisation conducting
anti-torture activities in Egypt. It manages a clinic, conducts advocacy,
campaigning and provides legal aid to survivors of torture and violence. The
clinic is registered in Egypt both with the Doctors' Syndicate and the Ministry
of Health and has provided hundreds of torture victims with vital services
including counseling, long and short term psychotherapy and rehabilitation. The
Center issues monthly summaries of reported instances of torture, deaths, and
medical negligence in police custody. Many of the Center’s patients say they have been tortured by
Egyptian security forces. 


 See The Observatory Urgent Appeal EGY 005 / 1116 / OBS 102, issued on November 16, 2016.


[3]       The
law 453/1954 regulates industrial and commercial shops, however, not clinics.
The law states that “no business shop subject to this law can be set up or run
without the relevant license; no changes or amendment in such shops may be
executed without the approval of entity which issued such license.”


[4]                 The other two flats belong to El
Nadeem Center organisation. 