Congo, Democratic Republic:  D.R. Congo'DRC: a child sentenced to death dies in prison
October 17, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / Congo, Democratic Republic / 2001 / OctoberCongo, Democratic Republic: D.R. Congo'DRC: a child sentenced to death dies in prisonCase COD 181000  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo.  Brief description of the situation:  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of young individuals of the South-Kivu Province detained in the cells of the National Intelligence Agency ("Agence Nationale de Renseignements" – ANR/Bukavu), as well as in the Saïo military camp, in the military brigade in Bukavu, and in private houses belonging to officers of the Rwandan Patriotic Army (RPA) based in Bukavu.   According to the information received from a reliable source, among the people detained are: Mr Puis Rugamika, Mr Benoît Ntumulo, Mr Mena Kayembe, Mr Jean-Pierre Bosingizi, Mr Foker (pseudonym), Mr Katchu (pseudonym) and Mr Jackson (pseudonym). They are accused of collaborating with the Maï-Maï and of being the people behind the grenade attack perpetrated during the Bukavu fair on 25 August 2000. Further reliable sources indicate that the RPA is being responsible for this attack. It is alleged that the young individuals have been subjected to torture in order to extract confessions from them.   Action requested:  Please write to the authorities in Democratic Republic of Congo urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of these young individuals, including Mr Puis Rugamika, Mr Benoît Ntumulo, Mr Mena Kayembe, Mr Jean-Pierre Bosingizi, Mr Foker (pseudonym), Mr Katchu (pseudonym) and Mr Jackson (pseudonym); ii.	order their immediate release in the absence of valid charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before a competent and impartial tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into these events and all allegations of torture, identify those responsible and apply appropriate sanctions; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with international human rights standards.  Addresses:  Me Joseph Mudumbi, Chef du Département de l'Administration du territoire du R.C.D. Goma - République Démocratique du Congo, N télécopie : 00 871 761 850 629 ou 632. Me Jean-Marie Emungu Ehumba, Chef du Département de la Justice, Réformes institutionnelles et Droits humains du R.C.D. Goma - République Démocratique du Congo N télécopie : Idem.  Please also notify :  The President Laurent-Désiré Kabila. Présidence de la République, Kinshasa-Ngaliema, République Démocratique du Congo. Fax (+ 243) 880 02 120. Mr Mwenze Kongolo, Minister of  Justice, Ministère de la Justice, BP 3137, Kinshasa Gombé, République Démocratique du Congo.  Mr Gaetan Kakudji, Minister of the Intérieur, Ministère de l'Intérieur, Hôtel du Conseil exécutif, Kinshasa - Gombé, République Démocratique du Congo.  Geneva, October 18, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 