China:  Ongoing arbitrary detention of Ms. Mao Hengfeng
October 29, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / China / 2012 / OctoberChina: Ongoing arbitrary detention of Ms. Mao Hengfeng
Please use the model letter to write to the
Chinese Minister of Justice and ask for the immediate release of Ms. Mao
Hengfeng, a human rights defender sponsored by our Project defend the defenders !She has been arrested and detained too many
times, this must stop: see our previous urgent appeals on her situation.
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the People’s
Republic of China in your respective country.

Ms. Wu Aiying
Minister of Justice of the People’s Republic of
China
Buzhang Sifabu, 10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie,
Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020
People’s Republic of China
By fax and email:+86 10 6529 2345
minister@legalinfo.gov.cn, pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cn

Re: Deep concerns about the arbitrary detention
of Ms. Mao Hengfeng
Dear Minister,
This letter is to request your government to take
immediate steps to unconditionally release Ms. Mao Hengfeng, a Shanghai based
activist who has been active in defending housing rights as well as in
promoting women’s reproductive rights.
I have been informed of her ongoing arbitrary
detention since September 30, 2010 and according to the information received
from various sources, Ms. Mao Hengfeng remained detained at Yangpu District
Police Detention Centre in Shanghai, on suspicion of “gathering a crowd to
disrupt public order” under Article 291 of the Chinese Criminal Code. Moreover,
her family members have not yet been allowed to visit her and while some of
them are currently making arrangements to find a lawyer, it is feared that the
latter will not be allowed to visit her neither.
Reportedly, Ms. Mao Hengfeng was taken away in Beijing
by two men in plain clothes believed to be Shanghai police officers on
September 30. She was subsequently taken from Beijing to Shanghai. The
Notification of Criminal Detention received by her husband did not mention when
Ms. Mao was arrested in Beijing nor when she was brought back to Shanghai.
I am deeply concerned about Ms. Mao Hengfeng’s
detention, which is believed to be aimed at preventing her from carrying out
campaigning work during the 18th National Congress of the Communist Party scheduled
to convene on November 8, and fears for her physical and psychological
integrity. It seems that she is merely sanctioned because of her human rights
activities and as such the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations
on 9th December 1998, are flagrantly violated by China.
I consequently ask you to release Mrs. Mao Hengfeng
immediately and unconditionally since her detention seems arbitrary and to put
an end to any acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Mrs.
Mao Hengfeng as well as against all human rights defenders in China. 
In the meantime, I kindly ask you to ensure that Mrs.
Mao Hengfeng’s physical and psychological integrity is guaranteed in all
circumstances. 
I am personally convinced that human rights defenders
play a fundamental role in the creation of a proactive civil society and that
freedom of expression and movement are the principal tools for them to
implement human rights norms in every society. 
To be strong and prosperous, China needs to respect
fundamental human rights norms such as the right to physical and psychical
integrity as well as freedom of expression. 
In the hope you will take these considerations and
requests into account,
Yours faithfully,



URGENT
APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
CHN
002 / 1012 / OBS 097
Arbitrary
detention / 
Ongoing
harassment
People’s
Republic of China
October
29, 2012
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent
intervention on the following situation in the People’s Republic of China.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by Chinese Human Rights Defenders
(CHRD) of the ongoing arbitrary detention since September 30 of Ms. Mao Hengfeng, a Shanghai
activist who has been active in defending the right to housing and opposing
forced evictions as well as in promoting women’s reproductive rights.
 
According to the
information received, as of issuing this Urgent Appeal, Ms. Mao Hengfeng
remained detained at Yangpu District Police Detention
Centre in Shanghai, on suspicion of “gathering a crowd to disrupt public order”
under Article 291 of the Chinese Criminal Code. Moreover, her family members
have not yet been allowed to visit her and while some of them are currently making arrangements to
find a lawyer, it is feared that the latter will not be allowed to visit her
neither.
 
Reportedly,
Ms. Mao Hengfeng was taken away in Beijing by two men in plain clothes believed
to be Shanghai police officers on September 30. She was subsequently taken from
Beijing to Shanghai. The Notification of Criminal Detention received by her
husband did not mention when Ms. Mao was arrested in Beijing nor when she was
brought back to Shanghai.
 
The Observatory expresses its deep concern
about Ms. Mao Hengfeng’s detention, which is believed
to be aimed at preventing her from carrying out campaigning work during the
18th National Congress of the Communist Party scheduled to convene on November
8, and fears for her
physical and psychological integrity. Accordingly, the Observatory calls upon the Chinese
authorities to take
prompt action in order to immediately and unconditionally release Ms. Mao
Hengfeng, and to put an end to the harassment against her, which seem to merely aim at sanctioning her
human rights activities. 
 
Background information:
 
The Observatory recalls that Ms. Mao Hengfeng
has been detained several times and subjected to ill-treatment in the past
years due to her human rights activities.
 
On February 23, 2010, Ms.
Mao Hengfeng was arrested at her hotel in Beijing by
Beijing and Shanghai police officers and placed under administrative detention
for ten days for “disturbing social order”. She was arrested and detained
because of the slogans she shouted
outside the Beijing Municipal No. 1 Intermediate People’s Court on December 25,
2009 to denounce the arbitrary sentencing of Mr. Liu Xiaobo, a prominent human rights
activist and scholar, co-author of the “Charter 08”, a petition calling for
political reforms and the protection of human rights in the People's Republic
of China. 
 
On March 4, 2010, Ms. Mao was ordered by the Shanghai
Municipal Committee for the Management of Re-education
Through Labour (RTL) to serve
one and a half year of RTL. While detained at
the Anhui RTL facility, Ms. Mao was subjected to ill-treatments, including
beatings by the RTL guards and by the persons in charge of the facility. 
 
On February 22, 2011, Ms. Mao Hengfeng was granted medical parole
because of her very high blood pressure. 
 
Yet, on the morning of February 23, 2011, more than ten police officers
blocked the entrance of her home and did not allow her to leave. The police
officers stayed in front of the house until February 24, 2011, when the Head of
the Anhui RTL facility, along with a dozen Shanghai and Anhui police officers,
entered Ms. Mao’s home and took her away and announced that her medical parole
had been rescinded[1]. It is not until June 9, 2011 that Ms. Mao’s husband received official notice
regarding Ms. Mao’s whereabouts, when he was
informed that she had been kept in the Shanghai prison general hospital from February 24 for treatment
of her high blood pressure.
 
On July 28, 2011, Ms. Mao
was released from RTL, one month before the completion of her 18-month RTL
order. The decision to release her early was based on the prison hospital’s
suggestion that she get hospital treatment outside of prison.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in the People’s Republic of China,
urging them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical
and psychological integrity of Ms. Mao Hengfeng; 
 
ii. Release Ms. Mao Hengfeng immediately and
unconditionally since her detention is arbitrary as it seems to only aim at
sanctioning her human rights activities;
 
iii. In the meantime, guarantee unconditional access to her lawyer
and family;
 
iv. Put an end to all forms of harassment,
including at the judicial level, against Ms. Mao Hengfeng as well as against
all human rights defenders in China; 
 
v. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9,
1998, especially its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right,
individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the
protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the
national and international levels”, and Article 12.2, which provides that “the
State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the
competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others,
against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present
Declaration”;
 
vi. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by the People’s Republic of China.
 
Addresses: 
 
·     
Mr. Wen Jiabao, Prime
Minister of the People’s Republic of China, Guojia Zongli, The State Council
General Office, 2 Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017, People’s Republic of
China, Fax: +86 10 65961109 (c/o Ministry of Foreign Affairs) 
·   Ms. Wu Aiying, Minister
of Justice of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang Sifabu, 10 Chaoyangmen
Nandajie, Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86
10 6529 2345, minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cn

·     
Mr. Dai Bingguo,
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang
Waijiaobu, 2 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Beijingshi 100701, People’s Republic of
China, Fax: +86 10 6588 2594, Email: ipc@fmprc.gov.cn
·     
Chief of the Public Security Bureau,
Yangpu Branch, Shanghai Municipal, Cai Tian Juzhang, No. 2049 Pingliang Road,
Yangpuqu, Shanghai, 200090, People’s Republic of China. Fax: +86 22 170130.
Email: Shyp@shyp.gov.cn 
·     
Chief of the Public Security Bureau,
Shanghai Municipal, Zhang Xuebing Juzhang, No.128 Wuning South Road, Jing’an,
Shanghai, 200042, People’s Republic of China. Fax: +86 24 062676. Email: gaj02@shanghai.gov.cn 
·     
Ambassador He Yafei,
Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China, Chemin de Surville 11,
P.O. Box 85, 1213 Petit-Lancy 2, Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7937014,
E-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int
·      Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in Brussels, Avenue de
Tervuren, 463 1160 Auderghem, Belgium, Tel: + 32 2 663 30 10 / + 32 2 663 30 17
/ +32 2 771 14 97 / +32 2 779 43 33; Fax: +32 2 762 99 66 / +32 2 779 28 95;
Email: chinaemb_be@mfa.gov.cn
 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the People’s
Republic of China in your respective country.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, October 29, 2012
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, a OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the protection
of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time
of need.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·     
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·     
Tel and fax OMCT + 41
(0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
·     
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25
18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80



[1] The Anhui RTL facility authorities cited Ms. Mao
Hengfeng’s “illegal activities inconsistent with [the stipulations of] medical
parole” as the basis of the decision, but did not specify what those activities
were. 