Kyrgyzstan:  Kyrgyzstan: Denial of registration
May 29, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2000 / MayKyrgyzstan: Kyrgyzstan: Denial of registrationURGENT ACTION - THE OBSERVATORY  KGZ 002 / 0005 / OBS 046 Denial of registration Kyrgyzstan 29th May 2000  The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, an FIDH  and OMCT venture, has requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Kyrgyzstan.  Brief description of the situation :  The Observatory for human rights defenders has been informed by the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR), a member of the OMCT, that the Guild of Conscience Prisoners (GCP), comprising of journalists and political figures systematically harassed by the authorities of Kyrgyzstan, has been denied registration.  According to the information received, the GCP, was set up in April 2000.  At this time the necessary documents were submitted to the Justice Ministry for registration.  The members include T. Turgunaliev, leader of “Erkindik” Party, Z. Sydykova, chief editor of “Res Publica” paper, Y. Omurzakov, editor of “Tribune” paper, J. Usupov, leader of “Ashar” movement, and journalists M. Sivashova, A. Alyanchikov and T. Slascheva.    On May 4th 2000, the Ministry of Justice refused to register the association.  The decree (Ref. 617) was signed by Deputy Minister E. Mamyrov with reference that the Charter of the association did not correspond to the law “on non-governmental organizations” and stated its remarks on the Charter.  The GCP took these remarks into account and resubmitted its documents on 20th May 2000.  On 23rd May 2000, the GCP received an Order (Ref. 1783) of the Ministry of Justice refusing registration.  A reason, among others, stated for this refusal was that “the association is created to defend rights of political prisoners, dissidents: However, according to the Kyrgyz Constitution no one can be subjected to discrimination of rights and freedoms for political views”.  This refusal of registration to the GCP is part of what seems to be a concerted policy on the part of the authorities, to constantly harass and place obstacles in the work of a legitimate human rights organisation.  The Observatory recalls that previously, in June 1999, the Kyrgyz authorities had unsuccessfully attempted to appropriate the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights’ (KCHR) equipment and furniture for a bogus organisation also named KCHR which was to “re-register” on 21st April 1999 in the place of the real of KCHR.  Following international pressure on the government, this attempt was dismissed and on 19th August 1999, the organisation was registered with legal status.  It is important to note, however, that KCHR was informed that the granting of the registration could be removed at any time “in case of the commands from upper instances”.    Action requested:  Please write to the Kyrgyz Authorities demanding that they:  i	immediately authorise the registration of the Guild of Conscience Prisoners;  ii. 	put an end to all forms of harassment of human rights defenders and their organisations, in particular refusing registration of organisations;  iv.	ensure the implementation of the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9 1998 (Declaration concerning the rights and responsibilities of individuals, groups and institutions to promote and protect universally recognised human rights and fundamental liberties ) in particular its Article 1 which provides that “Every person has the right, individually or collectively, to promote the protection and fulfilment of human rights and fundamental liberties at the national and international level.”  Also, Article 5.b. “For the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, at the national and international levels…To form, join and participate in non-governmental organizations, associations or groups.”   v.	guarantee the effective respect of fundamental rights and liberties in accordance with the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the international and regional Pacts and Covenants ratified by Kyrgystan.  Addresses:  The President of the Kyrgyz Republic, Askar Akayev, Kyrgyzskaya Respublika, 720003 g. Bishkek, Prospekt Chuy, 205 Fax: + 996 (312) 218 627   Geneva - Paris, 29th May 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken, quoting the reference number given above.  The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection  of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.  The Observatory was the winner of the 1998 Human Rights Prize of the French Republic.  To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line : Fax : +033 (0) 1 55 80 83 92  Tel : FIDH 33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11	OMCT +41 22 809 49 39 E-mail : observatoire@iprolink.ch 