Sri Lanka:  Sri Lanka: still no protection for Michael Anthony Fernando
February 10, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sri Lanka / 2004 / FebruarySri Lanka: Sri Lanka: still no protection for Michael Anthony FernandoCase LKA 180203.4 Death threats / Risk to personal integrity  Geneva, February 10th, 2004  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information  regarding the following situation in Sri Lanka.  New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Asian  Human Rights Commission (AHRC), a member of the OMCT network, of the  continuing risks to the personal integrity of Mr. Michael Anthony  Emanuel Fernando, a torture victim in Sri Lanka, who has now been  forced into hiding, having received death threats and having been the  victim of a failed kidnapping attempt on February 2nd, 2004. As a  result of this attempted kidnapping, in which Mr. Fernando was  sprayed in the face with chloroform, he was taken unconscious to  hospital.   Having been revived and later discharged from hospital at 12.30 pm on  February 7th, Mr. Fernando was initially accompanied home by the two  armed policemen who had been guarding him at the hospital under  orders from the Sri Lankan Ministry of Defence. However, according to  a statement made by the victim, the policemen told him that they were  only tasked with providing him with protection until they reached his  home, and that if he required further protection he should contact  their superiors. It is worth noting that Mr. Fernando has been the  target of a number of death threats and there have been numerous  requests at both the national and international levels for the  authorities to provide him with protection, in light of his  precarious situation.  As a result of the failure of the authorities to provide him with  adequate protection, Mr. Fernando has been forced into hiding and is  now living like a fugitive. He is reportedly unable to attend his  work or help his family and lives in constant fear for his life. A  request for protection made on his behalf to the President, who is  also in charge of the Ministry of Defense, has reportedly yielded no  result.  Furthermore, no one has yet been arrested in spite of the complaints  lodged by Mr. Fernando with the authorities concerning the recent  attempted kidnapping. All that has reportedly been done has been the  collection of Mr. Fernando's statement, but further no action is  reported.   The International Secretariat of OMCT urges the Sri Lankan  authorities to immediately take all measures necessary to guarantee  Mr. Michael Anthony Emanuel Fernando's physical and psychological  integrity, given this latest escalation in the harassment and threats  to which he has been subjected in recent months. He has reportedly  frequently been threatened and attacked despite the many pleas he has  made for protection. The fact that this most recent and grave attack  has taken place despite calls made at the national and international  levels for the authorities to provide him with protection is of  particular concern.  Background information   After being sentenced to a one year term of imprisonment on the basis  of alleged contempt of court, Mr. Fernando has filed several cases of  human rights violations against several prison guards who have  allegedly tortured him while he was in the custody. Mr. Fernando has  also filed a communication before the United Nations Human Rights  Committee challenging the validity of the Supreme Court Judgement,  declaring that it has no basis in law and violates his fundamental  rights. Former Special Rapporteur for the independence of the  Judiciary and Lawyers, Dato Param Curamarswarmy, publicly denounced  the judgement of the Supreme Court as an "act of injustice" by the  Supreme Court of Sri Lanka. Mr. Fernando was in fact released from  detention, in part due to AHRC and OMCT's efforts and the support  provided by their urgent appeals networks.  According to the information received, on February 2nd, 2004, Mr.  Fernando went to see a friend on Kalubowila Hospital Road. As his  friend was not there, he was going to visit another friend instead  when a bearded person reportedly exited a van and approached Mr.  Fernando, inquiring about whether he was in fact the man who has  asked for police protection and complained to the United Nations  about human rights violations. The bearded assailant then reportedly  sprayed chloroform into Mr. Fernando's face and held a handkerchief  to his mouth. Mr. Fernando felt dizzy and but was able to escape and  ran to a nearby tailor shop where he collapsed. Someone from the shop  informed his father who took him to the hospital. Mr. Fernando was in  an unconscious state upon arrival at the hospital but the doctors  have since managed to revive him. He is now reportedly recovering but  complains of a burning sensation as a result of the attack. Our  sources indicate that, had Mr. Fernando's would-be assailants managed  to get him into the van, he would have been at considerable risk of  forced disappearance and potentially death. This gives rise to  further concerns for his personal integrity.  Action requested   Please write to the authorities in Sri Lanka urging them to:  i.	take all measures necessary to guarantee the physical and  psychological integrity of Mr. Michael Anthony Emanuel Fernando; ii.	take appropriate measures to put an immediate end to the threats,  harassment and attacks to which he is being subjected; iii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the  circumstances of these events, in order to identify those  responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal  and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental  freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and  international human rights  standards.  Addresses  ·	Hon. Mr. Ranil Wickremasinghe, Prime Minister, Cambridge Place,  Colombo 7, SRI LANKA, Fax: +94 11 2 682905 / 575454, E-mail:  secpm@sltnet.lk or  bradmanw@slt.lk ·	Hon. Mr. K. C. Kamalasabesan, Attorney General, Attorney General's  Department, Colombo 12, SRI LANKA, Fax: +94 11 2 436 421, Email:  attorney@sri.lanka.net or counsel@sri.lanka.net ·	Mr. Ranjith Abeysuriya PC, Chairman National Police Commission, 69- 1 Ward Place, Colombo 7, Sri Lanka, Fax: +94 11 2 669 128 (need to  ask to change to fax  mode) / 691 926  ·	Dr. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Director, National Human Rights  Commission of Sri Lanka,  No. 36, Kynsey Road, Colombo 8, SRI LANKA, Fax: +94 11 2 694 924 /  696 470, E-mail: sechrc@sltnet.lk ·	Ambassador Prasad Kariyawasam, Rue de Moillebeau 56 (5ème) - CP  436, CH-1211, Genève 19, Suisse, E-mail:  mission.srilanka@ties.itu.int, Fax: +4122 734 90 84  Please also write to the embassies of Sri Lanka in your respective  country.  Geneva, February 10th, 2004  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this  appeal in your reply. 