Thailand:  Thailand: clash between villagers and police
July 21, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2000 / JulyThailand: Thailand: clash between villagers and policeThailand: clash between villagers and police  Case THA 210700  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Thailand.  Brief description of the situation:  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Asian Center for the Progress of People (ACPP), a member of the OMCT network, about a violent clash between the Thai police and villagers protesting the negative effects of the Pak Mun Dam project on 17 July 2000. More than ten people suffered injuries during the clash. Of the villagers, a total of 224 were arrested for trespassing and face a possible punishment of 5 years in jail, under Articles 364 and 365 of the Penal Code. It is reported that the police used excessive force in the clash, using tear gas and batons on the crowd.  According to the ACPP, villagers were protesting outside the Government House because the Pak Mun Dam has disrupted the fishing business of the village, the main livelihood of the villagers. Several weeks before, the government established a committee of experts, as the villagers had requested, to investigate the harmful effects of the dam. This committee recommended that the Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand (EGAT) open the flood gates of the dam for four months in the rainy season so that the fish can swim upstream from the Mekong river and spawn in the Mun river. This action would revitalize the fishing in the region and feed the community. However, the government and EGAD have not yet taken action on this recommendation.  According to the information received, the Pak Mun Dam project was first proposed in April 1989. The villagers from the districts that would be affected by the dam, in the Ubon Ratchathani Province, protested against the project two weeks later. Although protests and rallies opposing the dam continued, the Cabinet approved a budget for the building of the dam. During this time, the villagers never received any trustworthy information concerning the effects of the dam. It is reported that in 1991, the US Agency for International Development wrote a report which advised against building the dam. This report caused the World Bank to delay in giving Thailand a loan of US $22 million for the dam project.   Despite continued protests by villagers, as well as national and international environmental organizations, and opposition from the U.S., Germany and Australia, the annual World Bank meeting in 1992 resulted in a decision to give Thailand the loan to build the dam. The dam was completed in 1994. Although the design of the dam included a fish ladder to allow the fish to swim upstream, the design was not effective, as the villagers and independent fishery experts predicted. The effect of the dam has been to deprive local fisherman of their livelihood and cause a serious food shortage in the affected villages.   Action requested:  Please write to the authorities in Thailand and at the World Bank urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of all those arrested in the clash with the police and ensure the right to adequate redress;  ii.	implement the recommended actions of the committee, which was appointed by the government to investigate the negative effects of the dam on the surrounding villages;   iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  Prime Minister Chuan Leekpai, Government House, Pitsanulok Road, Dusit District, Bangkok 10300, Thailand. Fax: +66 2 282 8587 / 282 8631, Email: govspkman@mozart.inet.co.th  The Interior Minister, Assadan Road, Phranakorn District, Bangkok 10200, Thailand. Fax: +66 2 221 4481  The World Bank, Thailand Desk, 1818 H Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20433 U.S.A. Fax: +1 202 522 1556   Geneva, 21 July 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 