Angola:  Sentencing and arbitrary detention of 16 pro-democracy activists
March 31, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Angola / 2016 / MarchAngola: Sentencing and arbitrary detention of 16 pro-democracy activists
New information
AGO 001 / 0615 / OBS
053.3
Sentencing / Judicial harassment /
 Arbitrary detention
Angola
March 31, 2016
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Angola. 
New
information:
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the sentencing and arbitrary
detention of 16
pro-democracy activists, namely Messrs. Henrique Luaty Beirão, Nuno Alvaro Dala, Nelson Dibango Mendes Dos Santos, Alfonso Joao Matias (“M'banza Hamza”),
Sedrick de Carvalho, Fernando
António Tómas, Hitler Chiconda
(“Samussuku”), Italiano Arante Kivuvu, Benedito Jeremias (“Dito Dali”),
Albano Evaristo Bingobingo,
José Gomes Hata, Inocêncio De Brito, Manuel Nito Alves and Ms. Rosa
Kusso Conde, Ms. Laurinda Manuel Gouveia, journalist Mr. Domingos
da Cruz as well as Mr. Osvaldo Correia Caholo, a reserve military officer
acquainted to one of the 16.
According
to the information received, on March 28, 2016, the Luanda Provincial Tribunal
sentenced the 16 pro-democracy activists to jail terms ranging from two years
and three months to eight years and six months for the alleged crimes of
“preparatory acts of rebellion” (Article 21 of the Criminal Code) and
“association of criminals” (Article 263), among other charges.
Mr.
Domingos da Cruz was sentenced to eight-and-a-half years' imprisonment for the
crimes of “preparatory acts of rebellion” and “association of criminals”. Jeremias Benedito, Nuno Álvaro Dala, Sedrick de Carvalho, Manuel Nito
Alves, Inocêncio de Brito, Laurinda Manuel Gouveia, Fernando António Tomás,
Mbamza Hamza, Italiano Arante Kivuvu, Albano Evaristo Bingobingo, Nelson
Dibango Mendes Dos Santos, Hitler Chiconda and José Gomes Hata were all
sentenced to four years and six months in prison for the same crimes. Rosa Kusso Conde and Benedito Jeremias, who are considered as primary
offenders, were sentenced to two years and six months in prison. Mr. Henrique
Luaty Beirão, who was convicted of “falsifying documents” (Article 216),
alongside the above-mentioned crimes, was sentenced to five years and six
months in prison. Mr. Osvaldo Correia Caholo was also sentenced to four years
and six months in prison. Besides, Mr. Caholo is also expected to be tried by a
military court on charges of “theft of documents” (Article 424). Furthermore, all of them must pay a fine of 50,000 Kwanzas
(approximately 277 EUR) to the court.
The 16 were sent to
different prison facilities. Both the prosecution and defence lawyers stated
that they would appeal the verdict and sentences before the Supreme Court. They
have eight days to file the appeal. Mr. Osvaldo Correia Caholo was also sent
back to prison.
The Observatory notes
that the trial was marred with irregularities. During the closing arguments, on
March 21, 2016, the Prosecutor altered the charge sheet, dropping the charge of
“plotting against the President and other sovereign institutions”, and
including the new indictment of “association of criminals”, punishable with a
more severe sentence. This new charge was therefore not subjected to analysis
by the defendants' lawyers. Therefore, the defendants could not exercise their
right of defence regarding this new charge, in violation of the right to a fair
trial.
The Observatory also
highlights that the appeal process may take years before a verdict is reached. 
Finally, the
Observatory notes that the 16 should not have been detained, as the appeal
should suspend sentences in accordance with Article 658 of Criminal Procedure
Code. 
The Observatory strongly condemns the sentencing and
arbitrary detention of the 16 human rights defenders together with Osvaldo
Correia Caholo, which appear to be solely motivated by their peaceful and
legitimate action in the defence of human rights. 
Moreover, the Observatory calls upon the Angola authorities
to review the verdict and sentences and immediately and unconditionally release
the 16 human rights defenders together with Osvaldo Correia Caholo.
Background
information:
On June 20,
2015, 13 pro-democracy activists were arrested
by the police while participating in a book club meeting to discuss human
rights violations and governance concerns in Angola. The police carried out
searches without warrants and seized IT hardware from homes of some of the
people they suspected of taking part in the meeting.
On the same
day, following their arrest, the Director General of the Criminal Investigative
Service issued a statement saying that they are being accused of “preparing
acts aimed at disrupting public order and security in the country”. It was
later reported that they are being charged with “rebellion”, “attempted coup
d’Etat” and “crimes against national security”.
Furthermore,
on June 21, 2015, Mr. Domingos da Cruz was also arrested. Mr. da Cruz was
initially supposed to take part in the meeting as a speaker, but he finally did
not attend the meeting. 
On June 24,
Mr. Osvaldo Caholo, a reserve military personnel and university professor, was
arrested after the police found photos of him during a search conducted in the
residence of one of the thirteen youth activists.
On
June 30, 2015, CaptainMuhondo Zenóbio Lázarowas subsequently
arrested on the grounds of his alleged links with Mr. Osvaldo Caholo (they were
classmates). To date, no further information is available on the situation of
Captain Zenóbio Lázaro.
Most of the
young people arrested and detained are pro-democracy activists (except
lieutenant Osvaldo Caholo and Zenóbio
Lázaro) who have been organizing peaceful protests against the
36-year-regime of Angolan President Eduardo Dos Santos since 2011. These
protests were often shut down after only five minutes and protesters were
sometimes arrested and tortured.
It was also
reported that the authorities threatened the mothers of the young prisoners who
were getting mobilised. The ruling MPLA party has indeed prevented any kind of
mobilisation organised by supporters asking for their release; and a peaceful
demonstration by relatives of the prisoners that was organised in Luanda on
August 8, 2015 was met with attacks and was violently repressed by the security
forces on the ground.
On
September 16, 2015, the Prosecutor’s Office confirmed the charges of “crime of
preparatory acts to practice rebellion” and “plotting against the President and
other sovereign institutions” against the 14 pro-democracy activists arrested
in June 2015. Both provisions are in reference of Article 28 of the Law 23/10
of December 3, 2010 on Crimes against Security of the State. In addition to the
charges indicated above, Mr. Osvaldo Correia Caholo was also charged with
“misappropriation of documents”, Mr. Manuel Nito Alves with “illegal alteration
of his name/identity” and Mr. Henrique Luaty Beirão with three crimes of falsification of
documents. Moreover, Ms. Rosa Kusso Conde and Ms. Laurinda Manuel Gouveia, two
regular attendees of the book club meetings, were also charged on similar
accusations but were not detained. 
Although the Public Ministry formally signed the
accusations on September 16, 2015, it was only on September 30 that the defence
lawyers and families of the detainees were informed of the charges, following a
press conference organised by the latter. 
It is only on October 8, 2015, that the 16 were formally
informed of their indictment, when the maximum period for pre-trial prison, 90
days according to Angolan law, had already expired.
On November 16, 2015, the trial of the seventeen finally
opened before the Luanda Provincial Tribunal[1].
Several of the accused were subjected to acts of
ill-treatment and violence during their arrest and detention. Some of them out
of despair or to alert the general public on their ordeal, attempted suicide or
participated to hunger strikes. The last incident concerned Mr. Sedrick de
Carvalho who on December 15, 2015, attempted suicide. He was fortunately
rescued by the prison guards. A few days earlier, in an open letter, he had
threatened to commit suicide in protest against his 176 days of unlawful
detention. He added that, during his six months in detention, he had spent more
than 2,000 hours straight in solitary confinement without being able to see daylight.
On December 14, 2015, eight out of the 15 were on hunger strike, which they
ended upon their release on December 18[2].
On December 15, 2015, the Luanda Provincial Tribunal
approved the request of the Public Prosecutor to place the pro-democracy activists
under house arrest as of December 18. 
On January 25, 2016, the Luanda Provincial Tribunal
postponed to February 8, 2016 the hearing in the trial against the 17
above-mentioned persons. The Court was still due to hear more than 50
declarants[3]. 
On February 8, 2016, the trial resumed until February 10,
when it was again postponed until February 23, 2016. At that time,
approximately 46 were scheduled to be heard by the court. 
Moreover, on February 8, 2016, the Luanda Provincial
Tribunal sentenced Mr. Manuel Nito Alves to six months of imprisonment and to
pay a fine of AKZ 50,000 (approx. 284 Euros) for contempt of Court (disturbing
the order of the Court) during the trial of the 16 pro-democracy activists. Mr.
Manuel Nito Alves was allegedly heard to have called the trial “a farce” when
his father, Mr. Fernando Baptista, was being interrogated by the Counsel for
the public prosecutor's. Mr. Alves was silenced then accused by the presiding
judge Januário Domingos of “interjecting disrespectfully” and “offending and
disrespecting the court”, before being taken away by the authorities. He was
tried summarily and he was incarcerated at the Viana prison outside of Luanda. 
On February 19, 2016 the Luanda Provincial Tribunal
renewed the house arrest measure against the fifteen until April 19, 2016,
dismissing the request of the activists' lawyer to release them. 
On
February 23, 2016, the hearing of the merits resumed. 
Actions
requested:
Please
write to the authorities in Angola, urging them to:
i.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Messrs. Henrique Luaty Beirão, Manuel Nito Alves,
Nuno Alvaro Dala,
Nelson Mendes Dos
Santos, Alfonso Jojo Matias, Sedrick de Carvalho, Fernando António
Tómas, Hitler
Chiconda, Italiano Arante Kivuvu, Benedito Dali, Albano Bingobingo,
José Gomes Hata,
Inocénio De Brito, Domingos da Cruz as well as Ms. Rosa Kusso Conde and Ms.
Laurinda Manuel Gouveia as well as all those unduly associated with the
above-mentioned case and
all human rights defenders in Angola;
ii.
Immediately and unconditionally release the 16 pro-democracy activists by
dropping all trumped-up charges against them and, more generally, release all
human rights defenders detained in Angola, as these restrictive measures seem
to merely sanction their human rights activities;
iii.
Put an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against
the 16 activists and all those associated with the above-mentioned case and all
human rights defenders in Angola;
iv.
Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders, in particular with:
-
Its Article 1, which provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”;
-
Its Article 6(c), which foresees that “everyone has the right, to study,
discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law and in practice,
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through these and other
appropriate means, to draw public attention to those matters”;
-
Its Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary
measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone,
individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats,
retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
vii.
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
in accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Angola.
Addresses:
·      
Mr.
Ângelo de Barros Veiga Tavares, Minister of Interior, Avenida 4 de Fevereiro
n.º 106, Luanda República de Angola ; Tel: +244 222 390 423
·      
Mr.
Rui Jorge Carneiro Mangueira, Minister of Justice and Human Rights, Rua 17 de
Setembro, Cidade Alta, Luanda República de Angola, Fax: +244 222 370 150
/ 222 370 366
·      
H.E. Mr. Apolinário Jorge Correia, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of
Angola to the United Nations Office in Geneva, Rue de Lausanne 45-47 CH-1201
Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 732 30 72, E-mail: contact@mission-angola.ch
·      
H.E.
Elizabeth Simbrão, Ambassador, Embassy of Angola in Brussels, Rue Franz Merjay
182 1050 Brussels, Belgium, Tel: +32 23461872; Fax: +32 23440894, E-mail: angola.embassy.brussels@skynet.be
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Angola in your
respective country.


[1]                
For more information on the trial see Observatory
dossier describing and analysing the proceedings: "Why the Angola 15 trial is a parody of justice?"


[2]                
See Observatory Press Release of December 16, 2015. 


[3]                
The Court is hearing 50 people listed on a Facebook list on a “national
salvation government”. 


​ 