Russian Federation:  Shameful anti-LGBT bill must be voted down!
December 17, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2012 / DecemberRussian Federation: Shameful anti-LGBT bill must be voted down!


PRESS
RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

 
RUSSIAN
FEDERATION: Shameful anti-LGBT bill must be voted down!
 
Paris-Geneva, December 17, 2012. The Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT),
calls for the Russian Duma to vote down Draft Federal Law n°44554-6, which is
scheduled to be examined in first reading on December 19, 2012.
 
Under the pretext of protecting the rights of minors, the Draft Federal
Law n°44554-6 risks to sanction de facto
public demonstrations and gatherings of human rights defenders advocating for
the rights of lesbians, gays, bisexuals and transsexuals (LGBT).
 
If
adopted, this text would indeed amend the Russian Code of Administrative Law
Violations and make the promotion of homosexuality among minors an
administrative offence under federal law. 
 
Accordingly,
organisations or individuals defending the rights of LGBT or showing their
belonging to sexual minorities could be condemned, and fined to up to 500,000
rubles (about 12,500 euros). Since the concept of “promotion of homosexuality”
is not defined in the bill, this would open the door to abusive
interpretations, with the aim to stifle the legitimate activities of LGBT
groups in favour of fundamental freedoms.
 
The
examination of the bill takes place in a context in which over the past years
LGBT groups in the Russian Federation have increasingly been harassed –
legally, judicially, verbally and physically.
 
At
the legal level, on February 29, 2012, a bill prohibiting public activities
“promoting homosexuality, lesbianism, bisexuality and transgenderism among
minors” was approved in third reading by the Legislative Assembly of Saint
Petersburg. It came into force shortly after. The prohibition of so-called
“promotion of homosexuality” is already in force in a number of other regions
such as Ryazan region since 2006, as well as Arkhangelsk and Kostroma regions
since 2011.
 
At
the judicial level, a number of LGBT activists have been facing abusive charges
for promoting activities defending the rights of LGBT persons: in Saint
Petersburg, shortly before the passage of the local law, on February 8, 2012,
six LGBT activists were arrested during a protest before the Legislative
Assembly, as they were calling for LGBT rights. Five of them were then
abusively charged under the Administrative Code. On May 4, 2012, the Zentralnyi
District Municipal Court of Saint Petersburg sentenced Mr. Nikolai Alexeyev,
a prominent LGBT rights activist, lawyer and head of the LGBT Human Rights Project
GayRussia.Ru, to a 5,000 rubles fine (approximately 127 euros) under charges of
“promoting homosexual propaganda” under the recently enacted legislation. Mr.
Alexeyev had been arrested on April 12, 2012 while picketing alone in front of
the Smolny Institute holding a sign which affirmed that “homosexuality is not a
perversion”. He was then shortly detained by the authorities before being
released.
 
At
the verbal level, a number of public figures have taken hostile stances against
LGBT activities. In February 2012, the President of the Legislative Committee
of the Legislative Assembly of Saint Petersburg, Mr. Vitaly Milonov, compared
homosexuality with drug-trafficking and paedophilia. Most recently, an article
published in the Rossiyskaya Gazeta
newspaper alleged that people of “non traditional sexual orientation” were
exploiting the government to impose their unusual lifestyles upon other people,
and suggested that States should have the right to act as a censor in the
private domain. 
 
Such
slandering statements by officials fuel the level of homophobia within the
Russian population, and lead to increasing acts of intimidation against LGBT
persons and activists, notably from extremist groups. 
 
“I firmly denounce this shameful draft
legislation, and I call for its immediate withdrawal, as well as for the
immediate abrogation of similar legislations which are already in force at the
regional level” FIDH President Souhayr Belhassen said today. “If adopted, such a text would further
consolidate the repressive legislative arsenal, dramatically strengthened over
the past months to further strike down all human rights activities in the
country. This is unacceptable” she added.
 
“This
law runs directly counter a ruling by the United Nations Human Rights Committee
in October of this year (Fedotova vs Russia) that held Russia in violation of
human rights by penalising a picket for homosexuals. Rather than promoting
tolerance and complying with the decision as one should have expected this
piece entrenches discrimination and violations of freedom of speech and
assembly”, said Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General.
 
The
Observatory calls on the Russian authorities to fully conform with the
provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, and in
particular with Articles 6  (b), 6 (c),
and 12.2.
 
For additional
information, please contact:
FIDH: Arthur Manet / Audrey Couprie: 0033 1 43 55 25 18OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: 0041 22 809 49 39 