Greece:  Break-in and arson attack of the Afghan Community Centre and threats targeting the Hellenic League for Human Rights by an extreme right-wing group
March 30, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Greece / 2018 / MarchGreece: Break-in and arson attack of the Afghan Community Centre and threats targeting the Hellenic League for Human Rights by an extreme right-wing group

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
GRE 001 / 0318 / OBS 036
Arson attack / Break-in / Threats
Greece
March 30, 2018

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Greece.
 
Description
of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by the Greek Helsinki Monitor (GHM) about the
break-in and arson attack of the Afghan Community Centre’s[1]
premises in Athens as well as about threats targeting the Hellenic League for
Human Rights (HLHR) and originating from an extreme right-wing group, calling
itself Krypteia. 
 
According
to the information received, on March 22, 2018, at around 1 pm, an arson attack
with racist motives was perpetrated against the Afghan Community Centre’s
premises located in central Athens. 
 
The assailants broke into the Afghan Community Centre’s
premises and smashed computers, speakers and framed photos on the wall, before
starting the fire by pouring flammable liquid in the office. The arson attack
caused significant damages to the premises, but luckily no injuries, since at
this time the office workers had left on their lunch break. A complaint has
been filed before the department engaged in the fight against racial violence
of the Hellenic police in Athens, which is currently investigating the
incident.
 
On March 23, 2018, a little-known extreme
right-wing group, calling itself Krypteia[2] claimed
responsibility for the arson attack on the Afghan Community Centre, in a call
to the Greek newspaper “Ethnos”. 
 
The Observatory recalls that this not the first
racist incident targeting the Afghan Community Centre and its work advocating
for the respect of the Afghan migrant and refugee community’s human rights. The
arson attack comes after the Afghan Community Centre received a swell of death
threats from far-right groups. Moreover, in 2010, the Afghan Community Centre
had already been attacked by a band of far-right assailants armed with sticks
and knives, who kicked in the door of its premises, broke in, destroyed and
beat Mr. Yonous Muhammadi, who
was president of the Afghan Community in Greece at the time. 
 
In
addition, on March 22, members of HLHR’s
staff were threatened by members of Krypteia at their office in central Athens.
They hit the doorbell at the entrance of the block where the office is located
and threatened HLHR’s staff over the interphone and advised them to take great
care. Shortly after the incident, HLHR filed a complaint before the department
engaged in the fight against racial violence of the Hellenic police in Athens,
which is currently investigating the incident. Prior to this incident HLHR had
already been threatened by Krypteia over the phone in relation to their work on
migrants and refugee rights and in particular their collaboration with Racist
Violence Recording Network[3]. 
 
The
Observatory highlights that the situation of minority rights defenders in
Greece has been critical for years. Human rights defenders dealing with this
matter are consistently targeted for their legitimate work and face different
types of attacks, surveillance, arbitrary arrests, detentions, ill-treatment,
entry bans and expulsion[4]. The
Observatory is also concerned by the fact that several complaints related to
racism and minority’s rights have not been investigated and/or have been sent
to the “archive of unknown perpetrators”[5].

 
The
Observatory expresses its deep concern for the overall situation of minority
rights defenders in Greece, and urges the Greek authorities to conduct an
immediate, thorough, impartial and transparent investigation into the
above-mentioned incidents against the Afghan Community Centre and HLHR in order
to identify all those responsible, bring them before an independent tribunal,
and sanction them as provided by the law.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Greece asking
them to:
 
     
i.        
Put in place all necessary measures to guarantee the security and the physical and psychological
integrity of the staff members of the Afghan Community Centre and HLHR, as well
as of all minority rights defenders in Greece;
 
    
ii.        
Carry out an immediate, thorough, impartial, and
transparent investigation into the events described above in order to identify
all those responsible, and sanction them as provided by the law;
 
  
iii.        
Put
an end to all acts of harassment against the Afghan Community Centre and HLHR,
as well as all minority rights defenders in Greece, so that they are able to
carry out their work without hindrance or fear of reprisals;
 
   
iv.        
Comply
with all the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in
particular with its Articles 1, 5(b), and 12.2;
 
    
v.        
Ensure
in all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with
international human rights instruments ratified by Greece. 
 
Addresses:
 
·      
Prime
Minister of Greece, Mr. Alexis Tsipras, Email: mail@primeminister.gr
·      
Minister
of Justice Mr. Stavros Kontonis Email: grammateia@justice.gov.gr
·      
Alternate
Minister for Citizens Protection of Greece, Mr. Nikolaos Toskas, Fax: +30 210
692 9764, Email: minister@mopocp.gov.gr
·      
General
Secretary for Transparency and Human Rights, Ms. Maria Yannakaki, Fax: Email:
ggdad@justice.gov.gr
·      
Deputy
Permanent Representative of Greece, Mr. Ioannis Tsaousis, First Counsellor,
Permanent Mission of Greece to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax:
+41 22 732 21 50; Email: grdel.gva@mfa.gr
·      
Ambassador
of Greece, H.E. Eleftheria Galathianaki, Embassy of Greece in Brussels,
Belgium, Fax: (+32) 2 545 5585, Email: gremb.bru@mfa.gr
·      
Permanent
Representative of Greece, H.E. Papastavrou Andreas, Permanent Representation to
the European Union (EU), Fax: +32 2 5515651, 5127912
Email: mea.bruxelles@rp-greece.be
Please also write to the diplomatic representations of
Greece in your respective countries. 
***
 
Geneva-Paris, March
30, 2018
 
Kindly inform
us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme
is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders
Mechanism implemented by international civil society. 
 
To contact the
Observatory, call the emergency line:
·       E-mail:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·       Tel and fax
OMCT +41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / +41 22 809 49 29
·       Tel and fax
FIDH +33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
 


[1]                The Afghan Community Centre is the main non-governmental organisation representing and defending human rights of the Afghan migrant and refugee community in Greece. Its office is also the community Centre where classes, celebrations and gathering with children and adults usually take place. 

[2]                This group was largely unknown until it took credit
for an attack on Emir, an 11-year-old Afghan boy’s home in November 2017, where
they left behind a note urging him to "go back to [his] village".


[3]                The Racist Violence
Recording Network primarily focuses on monitoring and recording of racist
attacks against refugees and migrants in Greece and has received similar
threats by Krypteia.


[4]                See
OMCT’s Written Submission to the 35th Session of the United Nations Human
Rights Council on the situation of minority rights defenders in Greece of May
25, 2017. 


[5]                See OMCT’s Urgent appeal “Greece: Impunity regarding the
attacks perpetrated in December 2016 against minority human rights defenders”,
issued on February 21,
2018. 