Egypt:  Two Years since Rabaa Massacre, Impunity still Reigns in Egypt
August 14, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Egypt / 2015 / AugustEgypt: Two Years since Rabaa Massacre, Impunity still Reigns in EgyptEgypt Joint PR EN2 pages / 525 KB
Two Years since Rabaa Massacre, Impunity still Reigns in Egypt
Brussels, 14
August 2015:  On
this day two years ago, the Egyptian army and riot police launched a deadly
onslaught on supporters of ousted President Mohamed Morsi, leaving hundreds dead and thousands
injured. 
Our organisations call upon the European Union (EU)
to strongly condemn the prevailing impunity and failure of the authorities to
hold officials, police and army officers accountable for the use of excessive
force against protesters.
The tragic dispersal of gatherings in al-Nahda
and Rabaa al-Adawiya squares in Cairo marked a grim milestone in the crackdown on
dissent, including civil society, peaceful protesters and human rights
defenders. Instead of promoting “stability” as the Egyptian authorities claim,
these heavy-handed actions have deepened a vicious cycle of violence and terrorism.
While Egypt paid lip service to a
recommendation in the UN Universal Periodic Review to investigate excessive and
lethal force by security forces to disperse peaceful protests, it has shown no
commitment to conducting effective and impartial inquiries. Despite similar
calls by the National Council for Human Rights for an inquiry into the Rabaa events,
prosecutors have failed to thoroughly investigateany allegations of unlawful use of forcebymilitary or police officers. Since
August 2013, only one policeman has been convicted for the murder of peaceful
protester Shaimaa El Sabbagh.
Tens
of thousands of protesters have been detained for alleged violations of the “Protest
Law” whose draconian provisions breach the most basic international standards on
freedom of association. Egypt also witnessed a sharp spike in death sentences over the past years,
with 509 sentences in 2014 compared with 109 in 2013. Hundreds more are still
on death row, including leaders of the outlawed Muslim Brotherhood movement as
well as hundreds of alleged Morsi supporters. According to Amnesty International,
seven men have been executed in Egypt in 2015 following grossly unfair trials,
including in special military courts.
According to the “No to Military Trials for
civilians” campaign, over 3,000 civilians were tried in military courts between
April and December 2014. This trend was further consolidated by a series of
legislative changes. In October 2014, the military jurisdiction was extended to apply to large parts of
public spaces. Following an anti-terror law adopted in December 2014, another
anti-terrorism bill is set to establish a special court with an exceptional
judicial and appeal regime. This has taken place without parliamentary
oversight as legislative elections, which were supposed to be organised in the
summer of 2014, have yet to take place. According to the Tahrir Institute for
Middle East Policy, 160 laws have been adopted by decree the last two years.  
Torture,ill-treatment and
death in custody are rife in police stations and other places of detention. El
Nadeem Center for Rehabilitation of Victims of Violence has documented at least
74 deaths in custody since the beginning of 2015, many as a result of
inadequate medical care and torture. In June 2015, Freedom of the Brave, the
outlawed April 6 Youth Movement and Students against the Coup reported an
increase in enforced disappearances
and arrests of young activists. 
In light of
this, we urge the EU to:
-       
Call upon the Egyptian authorities to conduct
independent, impartial and effective investigations into alleged unlawful
use of force by the police and the army;
-       
Call upon the Egyptian authorities to
withdraw and review the Protest law;
-       
Ask the Egyptian government to
impose a moratorium on the death penalty with a view to abolishing it;
-       
Urge the Egyptian judiciary to
respect fundamental freedoms, including the right to a fair trial in accordance
with international standards, and immediately release and drop the charges
against all individuals detained solely for peacefully exercising their rights
to freedoms of expression, association and assembly;
-       
Call upon the Egyptian
authorities to revise the law on associations to comply with international
human rights standards, including regarding access to foreign funding;
-       
Request the disclosure of the
whereabouts of all detainees held incommunicado and immediately grant them
access to their families, lawyers and doctors;
-       
Ban exports of
surveillance technologies that could be used to spy on and repress citizens and
uphold the ban on the export of security equipment or military aid which can
be used for internal repression.
List of signatories:
EuroMed Rights
OMCT
Člověk v tísni, o. p. s./ People in Need
FIDH
IFEX 