Uzbekistan:  'Uzbekistan: death in detention, allegedly under torture, of Parpiev Shuhratbek
June  6, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Uzbekistan / 2000 / JuneUzbekistan: 'Uzbekistan: death in detention, allegedly under torture, of Parpiev ShuhratbekUzbekistan: 31 year-old man dies from torture in detention  Case UZB 060600  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Uzbekistan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights of the death in detention, allegedly under torture, of Parpiev Shuhratbek in Uzbekistan.  According to the information received, Parpiev Shuhratbek  (born 1969 in Andijan) died in detention in Jaslik prison on 5 May, 2000, allegedly due to severe torture.  Mr. Shuhratbek was arrested in 1998, accused of being involved in " Vahhabizm, " in accordance with the 241st Article of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Uzbekistan (concealment of a crime).  The Morgue of the Sergeli region in Tashkent informed his family that Mr. Shuhratbek died of lung deficiency and pneumonia.  However, according to the people who carried out the Muslim rituals on his body before his burial, there were numerous signs indicating torture on his body.  This ritual showed that the cervical part of his head was smashed by a heavy object, his collar bone was broken, 4 or 5 ribs on both sides of the thorax were broken, signs of grazing were present, a huge abrasion covered with bruises between the scapulas was noted, the skin of the buttocks was flayed, and his wrists and feet were swollen and bruised.  The International Secretariat is gravely concerned by these allegations and recalls that Uzbekistan is a state party to the Convention against Torture which prohibits the use of torture and notes in Article 12 that "Each State Party shall ensure that its competent authorities proceed to a prompt and impartial investigation, wherever there is reasonable ground to believe that an act of torture has been committed in any territory under its jurisdiction."  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Uzbekistan urging them to:  i.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the alleged torture and death of Parpiev Shuhratbek, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; ii.	guarantee adequate compensation to the family of Parpiev Shuhratbek; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards, particularly the Convention Against Torture, ratified by Uzbekistan.  Addresses  President of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Islam Abduganievich KARIMOV, Respublika Uzbekistan, 700000 g. Tashkent, pr. Uzbekistansky, Rezidentsia prezidenta, Prezidentu Respubliki Uzbekistan, KARIMOVU I.A. Fax: ( 998 71) 139 53 15 Minister of Justice of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Siradzhuddin MIRSAFAYEV, Respublika Uzbekistan,700047 g. Tashkent. ul. Sayilgokh, 5 Ministerstvo yustitsii Respubliki Uzbekistan Ministru MIRSAFAYEVU S. Fax: (998 71) 133 51 76 Oliy Majlis Commissioner for Human Rights, Sayora RASHIDOVA (Ms), Respublika Uzbekistan, 700008 g. Tashkent, pl. Mustakillik, 2 Oliy Majlis Respubliki Uzbekistan, Upolnomochennoy po pravam, cheloveka pri Oliy Majlis, RASHIDOVOY S. Fax: (998 71) 139 85 55  Geneva, June 6, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 