Sudan:  Sudan : students arrested and tortured
January 15, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2004 / JanuarySudan: Sudan : students arrested and torturedURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY  SDN 002/0104/OBS 002 Arrests/ Arbitrary detention /Torture Sudan January 7th, 2003  The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint  programme of the FIDH and the OMCT, requests your urgent intervention  in the following situation in Sudan.  Brief description of the situation:  The Observatory has been informed by the Sudan Organization Against  Torture (SOAT) of the arrest of Mr. Waiel Taha, 23 years old, student  and active member of the SOAT student network in Sudan. Another  student at the Faculty of Art, Khartoum University, Mr. Yousif Fat'h  Al Rahman, who was arrested with Mr. Taha, was tortured and released  since then.  On January 5, 2004, members of the National Security Agency (NSA)  arrested Mr. Taha and Mr. Al Fat'h Al Rahman outside Khartoum  University Student Union Building. According to the information  received, they were apprehended by 9 individuals travelling in a  Toyota pick-up truck.   Mr. Fat'h Al Rahman was separated from Mr. Taha and was taken to the  NSA building near Old Khartoum High School. He was allegedly tortured  by 5 security officers who punched his face, beat the soles of his  feet and his back, kicked him, forced him to drink 3 litres of water  by inserting a bottle in his throat, tried to strangle him and  threatened him with death. On 6 January 2004, Mr. Fat'h Al Rahman was  handcuffed and blind folded, and pushed to a road near Mahmood  Sharief Station in Buri. He is currently receiving medical treatment  for his injuries.  Concerning Mr. Taha, a delegation from the Khartoum Student Union  went to the NSA office to request information on his whereabouts but  the NSA has denied his arrest. However, Mr. Fat'h Al Rahman has  confirmed that they were arrested together.  These events seem to be related to disturbances that took place on  January 3 and 4, 2004, at Khartoum University between students and  the guards. During the disturbances, the guards beat up the students  using metal wires and water hoses at the student's residence halls. A  number of female students who were injured decided to press charges  against the university guards. Mr Taha was organizing a series of  briefings and public talks sponsored by the Khartoum University  Student Union concerning these events.  The Observatory is gravely concerned about the lack of information  concerning Mr. Taha's whereabouts, as well as his physical and  psychological integrity, due to the aforementioned risk of his being  subjected to torture as was the case with co-detainee, Mr. Fat'h Al  Rahman.   Action requested:  Please write to the authorities of Sudan urging them to:  i. immediately locate Mr. Waiel Taha whereabouts and take all  necessary measures to guarantee his physical and psychological  integrity;  ii. order his immediate release in the absence of legal charges, or,  if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent  tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times; iii. order an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these  events, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil,  competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal and/or  administrative sanctions provided by law; iv. conform to the provisions of the Declaration on Humans Rights  Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on  December 9, 1998, in particular article 1, which states that  "everyone has the right, individually or in association with others,  to promote the protection and realization of human rights and  fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels";  article 12.2 which provides that "the State shall take all necessary  measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of  everyone, individually or in association with others, against any  violence, threats, retaliation, de facto o de jure adverse  discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a  consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred  to in the present Declaration."; v. ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and  fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights  standards.   Addresses:  · His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President  of the Republic of Sudan, People's Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum,  Sudan, Telex: 22385  PEPLC SD or 22411 KAID SD, fax : + 24911 783223  · Mr Ali Osman Yasin, Minister of Justice and Attorney General,  Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan. Telex:22459 KHRJA SD or 22461  KHRJA SD (via Ministry of  Foreign Affairs), fax : + 24911 788941  · Mr Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of  Foreign Affairs, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan, fax : + 24911 779383  · His Excellency Ambassador Ibrahim Mirghani Ibrahim, Permanent  Mission of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, Case Postal 335,  1211 Geneva 19, fax :  0041 (0) 22 731 26 56, email: mission.sudan@ties.itu.int.   Given the lack of working fax numbers for the government officials  above, please send the appeals by standard mail and also write to the  Embassy of Sudan in your country.  Paris - Geneva, January 7th, 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this  appeal in your reply. The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the  protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete  support in their time of need. The Observatory was the winner of the  1998 Human Rights Prize of the French Republic. To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:  E-mail: observatoire@iprolink.ch  Tel and fax FIDH 33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11 / 01 43 55 18 80  Tel and fax OMCT + 4122 809 49 39 / 41 22 809 49 29 