Algeria:  Joint Press Release: European Parliament passes resolution on imprisonment of workers’ and human rights activists in Algeria
May  1, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Statements / Algeria / 2015 / MayAlgeria: Joint Press Release: European Parliament passes resolution on imprisonment of workers’ and human rights activists in AlgeriaJoint PR Algeria1 page / 146 KBOn the eve of the International Workers’
Day on 1 May, our organisations welcome the resolution passed by the European Parliament calling
on the Algerian authorities “to ensure the safety and security of civil
society activists and human rights defenders and their freedom to pursue their
legitimate and peaceful activities”. 
The resolution reiterates a number of
concerns regularly raised by our organisations about the degradation of the
rights to freedom of expression, association and assembly in Algeria. Labour
rights activists are regularly arrested only for exercising their right to free
expression, and peaceful assembly and condemned to heavy penalties. These forms
of harassment, which seem to aim only at sanctioning human rights activism,
confirm the restrictive and repressive environment in which human rights
defenders, including labour rights activists, operate today in Algeria. 
This is the first resolution by the
Parliament on this country since more than a decade. Our organisations now call
on both the EU Member States and the EU High Representative to acknowledge the
European Parliament resolution and to: “ensure that there is a clear and principled
EU policy vis-à-vis Algeria […] in line with the EU Strategic Framework on
Human Rights and Democracy”. The EU should make sure the case of the eleven
workers’ and human rights activists will be discussed as a matter of priority at
the forthcoming EU-Algeria Association Council on 19 May. The resolution also reiterates
a key demand of our organisations by calling “on the European External Action Service
and the Member States to monitor closely all trials and judicial proceedings
against human rights defenders and labour rights activists”.
In line with the European Parliament
resolution, our organisations call on the Algerian authorities to immediately
and unconditionally release peaceful activists Rachid Aouine, Mohamed Rag, Khencha Belkacem, Brahimi Belelmi, Mazouzi
Benallal, Azzouzi Boubakeur, Korini Belkacem, Bekouider Faouzi, Bensarkha
Tahar, Djaballah Abdelkader, as well as to withdraw all charges against
them. The Algerian authorities should also put an end to all forms of
harassment and intimidation against labour rights activists and human rights defenders,
including at the judicial level.
Brussels-Copenhagen-Dublin-Geneva-Paris, 30 April 2015
Press
contacts: 
FIDH: Arthur
Manet / Lucie Kroening, +33 1 43 55 25 18, presse@fidh.org 
Front Line
Defenders: Emma Achilli, +32 2 230 93 83, emma@frontlinedefenders.org 
OMCT: Miguel
Martin Zumalacarregui: + 41 22 809 49 24, mmz@omct.org 
REMDH: Hayet Zeghiche, +32 488 08
00 41, hze@euromedrights.net 