Saudi Arabia:  Crackdown on Saudi women human rights defenders sets off alarms Over 30 human rights groups call for their immediate release
June  6, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Saudi Arabia / 2018 / JuneSaudi Arabia: Crackdown on Saudi women human rights defenders sets off alarms Over 30 human rights groups call for their immediate release​06 June 2018JOINT URGENT ACTION
Crackdown
on Saudi women human rights defenders sets off alarms
Over
30 human rights groups call for their immediate release
 
The undersigned human rights groups call on the Saudi
authorities to immediately and unconditionally release all human rights
defenders arrested in the past two weeks who were detained solely for their
support of women’s rights or other peaceful human rights work in Saudi Arabia.
We further call on the authorities to immediately reveal their whereabouts,
allow them access to their families and lawyers of their choice, hold
investigations in a transparent manner, and adhere to fair trial international
legal standards; while we believe that all charges against them must be dropped
and they should be immediately released. We are particularly alarmed that some
of those arrested could be sentenced to prison for their peaceful and
legitimate human rights work, including their decades-long campaigning to lift
the driving ban – ironically barely a month before the authorities are set to
finally lift it and enable women in the country to drive legally. 
 
The undersigned groups know of at least 12 named human
rights defenders whom Saudi authorities arrested in Saudi Arabia since 15 May
2018. They include advocates and supporters of the #Oct26driving, #Right2Drive
and #IAmMyOwnGuardian campaigns who dared to speak openly about human rights
violations in the country and are critical of state discrimination
against women in Saudi Arabia.
State media outlets have publicly declared seven women’s rights defenders and
supporters of the women’s rights movement as traitors, including Loujain
Al-Hathloul, a well-known women’s rights defender on
social media who was arrested on 15 May; Dr. Eman Al-Nafjan, founder and
author of the Saudiwoman's Weblog, who had previously protested
the driving ban; Aziza Al-Yousef, a
prominent campaigner for women’s rights; Dr. Ibrahim Al-Modaimegh, a lawyer and human rights defender; writer Mohammad Al-Rabea; Abdulaziz
Al-Mesha'al, businessman
and board member of a women’s rights NGO; and an unnamed man. The state media also
announced the arrest of
Ibrahim Fahad Al-Nafjan. 
 
Saudi human rights defenders also
confirmed the arrest of four other women’s rights defenders who have since
been released, including Dr. Aisha Al-Manae, Dr. Hessa Al-Sheikh and Dr.
Madeha Al-Ajroush, who had taken part in the first women’s protest movement
demanding the right to drive in 1990. At the time, 47 women had been arrested
for driving and had lost their passports and their jobs. The arrests and
subsequent release also included that of Walaa Al-Shubbar, a young
activist well-known for her campaigning against the guardianship system. They are all academics and professionals who
supported women’s rights and provided assistance to survivors of gender-based
violence. On 23 May, Dr. Aisha Al-Manae was released from custody, possibly due
to illness. Two days later, the Saudi authorities also released Dr. Hessa Al-Sheikh,
Dr. Madeha Al-Ajroush, and Walaa Al-Shubbar. The conditions of their release
remain unknown. Saudi authorities
have since arrested Mohammad Al-Bajadi, a human rights defender and
founding member of the Civil and Political Rights Association in Saudi Arabia
(ACPRA).
 
On 19 May 2018, the official Saudi Press Agency (SPA)
publicly acknowledged the arrest of seven of the  rights defenders and accused them of treason
and conspiracy against the country, stating that
they were being charged with “organized
action that encroaches on religious and national principles”, “suspicious communication with foreign
entities”, “recruiting people working in government positions”, “funding
hostile groups abroad to undermine Saudi national security, stability, social
peace and to destroy the social cohesion.” 
 
Shortly after, official and
semi-official media outlets started naming and shaming
detained human rights defenders on their front pages and social media accounts
calling them “traitors” and “agents of embassies” (عملاء_السفارات#). It is believed that the SPA statement refers directly to the
rights defenders named by Saudi media outlets.
 
SPA most recently reported that 17 people have been
arrested since 15 May, and eight have been released, leaving five men and four
women facing charges. 
 
The current crackdown on women human rights defenders,
which started in January 2018 when the Gulf Centre for Human Rights and local
partners verified the arrest of at least two women human rights defenders, including Noha Al-Balawi and Maria Naji, is part of a
larger crackdown on human rights defenders that has escalated over the past
years. On 10 November 2017, the Specialised
Criminal Court (SCC) in Riyadh sentenced woman human rights
defender Naimah Al-Matrod to six years in jail. These latest arrests
come following promises of reforms announced
in 2017 as part of Saudi Arabia’s Vision 2030 plan, which Crown Prince Mohamed Bin
Salman has enthusiastically promoted. 
 
We are extremely concerned about the conditions and
fate of detained human rights defenders, especially as their whereabouts remain
unknown, including Loujain Al-Hathloul, Eman Al-Nafjan and Aziza Al-Yousef, who
continue to be detained incommunicado. Saudi sources close to Loujain
Al-Hathloul say that her detention is an act of reprisal for her engagement
with international human rights mechanisms, including UN human rights bodies. 
 
During the 69th session of the Committee on the
Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), three
human rights NGOs presented a report that concluded that there had been insufficient progress
on women’s rights in Saudi Arabia and that the Saudi authorities should address
continuing violations of women’s rights more comprehensively. 
 
Saudi Arabia issued a royal decree in September 2017 announcing that women
would be allowed to drive as of 24 June 2018, offering the image promoted by
Saudi-funded public relations firms that Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman
was a reformer. However, following the announcement, officials in the royal
court specifically warned women
human rights defenders to remain silent and told them not to give
media interviews or post on social media. 
 
We,
the undersigned organisations, urge the Saudi authorities to: 
 
1.     Release all persons detained solely for
peacefully exercising their rights to freedom of expression, association and
peaceful assembly immediately and unconditionally, and drop all charges against
them; 
2.     Immediately reveal the whereabouts of Loujain
Al-Hathloul, Eman Al-Nafjan, Aziza Al-Yousef, Mohammad Al-Bajadi, Abdulaziz
Al-Mesha'al, Ibrahim Al-Modaimegh, and 
Mohammad Al-Rabea and allow them immediate access to their families and
lawyers of their choice;
3.     Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological safety and
integrity of all human rights defenders in Saudi Arabia;
4.     Immediately put an end to the harassment of
women human rights defenders, including those who have been actively and
bravely campaigning for women's rights;
5.     Allow all members of Saudi society including women
to exercise their rights, including their rights to freedom of expression,
peaceful assembly and association, without any judicial harassment or other
reprisals; and
6.     Guarantee in all circumstances that all human
rights defenders, including women’s rights defenders, are able to carry out
their legitimate human rights activities without fear of reprisal.
 
TAKE ACTION NOW!

We ask all supporters to please write a letter, send an email, call, fax or
tweet using the hashtag #ReleaseSaudiWHRDs
urging the Saudi
authorities to act on the above recommendations.
 
Contact the following
officials:
King and Prime Minister 
His Majesty King Salman bin Abdul Aziz Al Saud
The Custodian of the two Holy Mosques
Office of His Majesty the King
Royal Court, Riyadh
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Fax: (via Ministry of Interior)
+966 11 403 3125 (please keep trying)
Twitter: @KingSalman
 
Ambassador Prince Khalid bin Salman
bin Abdulaziz,
Royal Embassy of Saudi Arabia
601 New Hampshire Ave. NW, Washington DC 20037
Phone: (202) 342-3800 I Fax: 202 295 3625
Email: info@saudiembassy.net
Contact Form: https://www.saudiembassy.net/contact
Twitter: @SaudiEmbassyUSA 
 


 
Signed,
1.    
ARTICLE
19
2.    
Al-Marsad - Arab Human Rights Center in Golan Heights
3.     Al-QST
4.     Americans for Democracy & Human Rights in
Bahrain (ADHRB)
5.     Amnesty International
6.     Arabic Network for
Human Rights Information (ANHRI)
7.     Association Marocaine des
Droits Humains (AMDH)
8.     Association Tunisienne
des Femmes Démocrates (ATFD)
9.     Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies
(CIHRS)
10.  CIVICUS: World
Alliance for Citizen Participation
11.  Committee for the
Respect of Liberties and Human Rights in Tunisia
12.  English PEN
13.  European Centre for Democracy and Human Rights
(ECDHR)
14.  European-Saudi
Organisation for Human Rights
15.  FIDH, within the framework of the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
16.  Front Line Defenders
17.  Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR)
18.  Human Rights Watch
19.  International
Service for Human Rights (ISHR)
20.  Lawyers for Justice in
Libya
21.  Ligue algérienne des
droits de l’homme (LADDH)
22.  Maharat Foundation
23.  Organization
against Torture in Tunisia
24.  PEN International
25.  Secularism Is A Women's Issue (SIAWI)
26.  Sisters' Arab Forum for Human Rights (SAF)
27.  Tunis Center for Press Freedom
28.  Tunisian Association for the Defence of
Academic Values
29.  Tunisian Forum for
Economic and Social Rights
30.  Tunisian League for
Human Rights (LTDH)
31.  Urgent Action Fund for Women's Human Rights
32.  Vigilance for
Democracy and the Civic State
33.  WHRD-MENA
Coalition 
34.  World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders 