Philippines:  Philippines: execution of young political leader, Isaias Manano Jr
May 14, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2004 / MayPhilippines: Philippines: execution of young political leader, Isaias Manano JrCase PHL 140504 Execution   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in  the Philippines.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Asian Human Rights  Commission HK, a member of the OMCT network, of the execution of 23-year old Isaias Manano Jr, the young leader of the Anakpawis-Mindoro Oriental progressive political party, in the Philippines.  According to the information received, on April 28th, 2004, Isaias Manano Jr. was fatally shot on his way home from visiting a mayoral candidate near the Divine Word College in Calapan city. Isaias Manano Jr. was a church youth leader and the secretary general of Anakpawis-Mindoro Oriental (Toiling Masses-Mindoro Oriental), a progressive political party aiming for a party list seat in the Philippine Congress.   At around 8 pm on April 28th, 2004, Manano and Anakpawis Vice-Chair Guillermo Coz reportedly went to visit mayoral candidate Bodjie Ignacio at in Block 4, Brgy. Pachoca subdivision, Calapan city. They left Mr. Ignacio's house at around 9 pm, and as they walked towards the main road, they noticed a man following them. He was described as heavily-built, with a short haircut, a black t-shirt, shorts, rubber slippers and a pack bag slung over his right shoulder. Upon reaching Block 1 of Brgy. Pachoca, they decided to part ways to evade the man. Isaias Manano Jr. crossed the street while Guillermo Coz continued walking. Suddenly, Guillermo Coz heard a shot and when he turned to look, he saw Isaias Manano Jr. fall to the ground and the assailant aiming at him from a kneeling position. Guillermo Coz dodged and ran for safety while shouting for help.   According to the information received, Isaias Manano Jr. died on the spot from two gunshot wounds. The first bullet, of a still-undetermined calibre, reportedly hit Isaias Manano Jr. in the back near the spinal column and exited through his stomach. The other bullet entered the right side of his temple and exited below his left ear.  Reports claim that the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) are allegedly involved in the killing, particularly the 204th Infantry Brigade commanded by Col. Fernando Mesa. Isaias Manano Jr. had allegedly been active in the campaign against massive deployment of AFP soldiers and the widespread human rights violations in Mindoro Oriental. Isaias Manano Jr. reportedly also faced grave threats and harassment before his death, for the afore-mentioned work. Col. Fernando Mesa has reportedly denied that the military killed Isaias Manano Jr.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned by the execution of Isaias Manano Jr. and the allegations of military involvement in this act. OMCT calls on the authorities of the Philippines to carry out an immediate, impartial and effective investigation into the execution of Isaias Manano Jr. in order to identify those responsible, bring them to justice and guarantee that Isaias Manano Jr’s family receives adequate reparation. OMCT is concerned that this killing has occurred just prior to national elections, which are to held later this month.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Philippines urging them to:  i.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of this execution, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; ii.	guarantee that adequate reparation is provided to Isaias Manano Jr’s family; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	Ms. Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President, Republic of the Philippines , New Executive Bldg. , Malacanang Palace Compound, J. P. Laurel St., San Miguel, Manila, PHILIPPINES , Fax: (+63) 2 929 3968, E-mail: opnet@ops.gov.ph, kgma@yahoogroups.com   ·	The Secretary of Justice, The Department of Justice (DOJ) Philippines, Department of National Defense, Camp Gen. Emelio Aguinaldo Quezon City, PHILIPPINES, E-mail: osnd@philonline.com   ·	Purificacion Quisumbing, Commissioner, Commission on Human Rights (CHR) , SAAC Bldg., Commonwealth Ave., U.P. Complex, Diliman, Quezon City, PHILIPPINES, Fax: (+632) 929 0101 / 928 0848, E-mail: drpvq@chr.gov.ph  Please also write to the embassies of Philippines in your respective country.  Geneva, May 14th, 2004  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 