Egypt:  Judicial harassment of Ms. Azza Soliman
January 29, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2015 / JanuaryEgypt: Judicial harassment of Ms. Azza Soliman007 EGY_001_0115_OBS 007 Arabic208 KBEGY 001 / 0115 / OBS 007
Judicial harassmentEgyptJanuary
29, 2015 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in
Egypt.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the judicial
harassment of Ms. Azza Soliman, human rights lawyer and founder of the
Centre for Egyptian Women Legal Aid (CEWLA). 

 
On January 24, 2015, Ms. Azza Soliman voluntarily went to the Public
Prosecution's office to give her testimony regarding the violent dispersal of a
protest organised by the political party Popular Alliance on the same day by
security forces, which lead to the death of one political activist. Ms. Soliman
did not take part in the protest, but was coincidentally in the same area and
witnessed the dispersal and the shooting of the activist. 
 
After waiting several hours at the Public Prosecution's office, Ms. Azza
Soliman was finally able to give her testimony, pointing out the responsibility
of the police for the death of the activist. Ms. Soliman also filed a complaint
accusing the Minister of Interior and security forces of having violently
dispersed the peaceful protest. 
 
Upon completion of her testimony, the prosecutor then interrogated her,
and informed her that he had pressed charges against her and four other
witnesses for “illegal gathering” and “participating in an unauthorised protest
that harmed public security”[1].
Ms. Soliman was released along with the other four, pending investigation. 
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the judicial harassment against Ms. Azza Soliman,
which only aims at sanctioning her recent reports on human rights violations,
as part of her legitimate human rights activities. The Observatory calls on the
authorities to drop all charges held against her, and put an immediate end to
this judicial harassment. 
 
The Observatory deems that this case illustrates a wider trend of
repression against human rights defenders in Egypt. In particular, the
Observatory condemns the restrictive protest law, which bans gatherings of ten
or more people without a permit issued by the authorities, and which has been
repeatedly used by the authorities as a tool to harass and imprison human
rights defenders.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Egypt asking them to:
 
i.              
Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Azza Soliman and
the four other witnesses, as well as of all human rights defenders in Egypt;
 
ii.             
Drop the charges against
Ms. Azza Soliman and the four other witnesses, and put an end to all acts of harassment,
including at the judicial level,  against
them and all human rights defenders in Egypt;
 
iii.          
Reform the restrictive
protest law in order to allow human rights defenders to carry out their
activities in the country and in order to allow for the population to
participate in peaceful demonstrations;
 
iv.  Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, in particular with:
-    
its Article 1, which
provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-    
its Article 5(a): “For
the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms,
everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, at the
national and international levels (a) To meet or assemble peacefully”
-    
its Article 6(a), which
foresees that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to participate in peaceful activities against violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms”;
-    
its Article 12.2, which
provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 
v.    Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Egypt.
 
Addresses
·      
President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, H.E. Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, Abedine
Palace, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 23901998
·      
Prime Minister, Mr. Ibrahim Mehleb, Magles El Shaab Street, Kasr El Aini
Street, Cairo, Egypt. Fax: + 202 2735 6449 / 27958016. Email: primemin@idsc.gov.eg
·      
Minister of the Interior, General Mohamed Ibrahim Moustafa, Ministry of
the Interior, El-Sheikh Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: moi1@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2579 2031 / 2794
5529
·      
Minister of Justice, Mr. Mahmoud Saber, Ministry of Justice, Magles El
Saeb Street, Wezaret Al Adl, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2795 8103
·      
Public Prosecutor, Counsellor Hisham Barakat Dar al-Qadha al-Ali, Ramses
Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 2577 4716
·      
Mr. Mohamed Fayeq, President of the National Council For Human Rights,
Fax: + 202 25747497 / 25747670. Email: nchr@nchr.org.eg
·      
H.E. Ms. Wafaa Bassim,
Ambassador, Permanent
Mission of Egypt to the United Nations in Geneva, 49 avenue Blanc, 1202 Genève,
Switzerland, Email: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41 22 738 44 15
·       Embassy of Egypt in Brussels, 19 avenue de
l’Uruguay, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 675.58.88; Email: embassy.egypt@skynet.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Egypt in
your respective country.
 


[1]    The
four witnesses are facing additional charges. 