Intervention to the 56th session of the African Commission for Human and Peoples' Rights
April 30, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Algeria / 2015 / AprilIntervention to the 56th session of the African Commission for Human and Peoples' RightsOral Intervention EN3 pages / 53 KB
AFRICAN COMMISSION ON HUMAN AND
PEOPLES' RIGHTS
56th ordinary session
Banjul, The Gambia
April 21 - May 7, 2015
Contribution of the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) 
and the 
World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) 
In the framework of their joint
programme, 
The Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders 
Madam President, 
Madam the Special Rapporteur for
Human Rights Defenders,
Madam and Sir Commissioners,
Madam and Sir Delegates,
FIDH and OMCT, in the framework of
the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, once again
express their grave concern about the situation of human rights defenders in
Africa.
Arbitrary arrests, detentions and judicial
harassment of human rights defenders are still used as means to persecute
and silence human rights defenders throughout the African continent. 
In Algeria, with
already ten of their colleagues in detention, labour rights activists Abdelhamid
Brahimi, Ferhat Missa and Youssef Sultani are judicially
harassed for criticising the police on Facebook and for their participation to
peaceful demonstrations in El Oued. Their trial is ongoing.
In Burundi, Pierre
Claver Mbonimpa, was re-arrested on April 27, 2015 for publicly speaking
against a third mandate of President Pierre Nkurunziza.
In Cameroon, Franklin
Mohwa, president of Frontline Fighters for Citizens Interests (FFCI) is
arbitrarily detained and prosecuted, so is Célestin Yandal, president of
the Touboro Youth Collective.
In the DRC, the trial
of detained human rights defender Christopher Ngoyi Mutamba, National
Chairman of the NGO “Synergie Congo culture et développement” and
Coordinator of the platform Civil Society of Congo, opened on March 4, without
any prior notice to the defendant who is facing a heavy prison sentence.
In Egypt, many human
rights defenders, including Yara Sallam, Sanaa Seif and Alaa
Abdel Fattah are still arbitrarily detained for exercising their legitimate
right to peaceful assembly. 
While they are not currently
detained, human rights lawyers, Mahienour El-Massry, Amr Abu-Elkhair
and Azza Soliman; are still facing judicial harassment.
In Sudan, Adil
Bakheit, member of the Board of Trustees of the Sudan Human Rights Monitor
(SHRM), was arrested on April 16, 2015.
In addition, over the last years, land
rights defenders have become the target of a growing harassment aiming at
silencing dissenting voices likely to slow down investment projects. 
In Cameroon, Nasako
Besingi, Director of the NGO Struggle to Economize Future Environment
(SEFE), was attacked on August 29, 2012.
In Uganda, Gerald
Kankya, Executive Director of the Twerwaneho Listeners Club (TLC), has been
the target of a particularly harsh judicial and physical harassment since the
beginning of 2015.
In Sierra Leone, the
ongoing judicial harassment against several members of the Malen Land Owners
and Users Association (MALOA), illustrates the harassment which land rights
defenders are the target of in the country.
Furthermore, in several countries,
human rights defenders have also been subjected to threats and defamation
campaigns.
In
Angola, the increasing insecure environment in which human rights
defenders operate constitutes a direct threat to their work.
In
Cameroon, threats against Maximilienne Ngo Mbe, REDHAC
Executive Director and Executive Secretary of the PRODHOP, and members of her
family  must be taken seriously by
authorities who should ensure their protection.
Still in Cameroon,
acts of intimidation have been particularly directed against those who defend
LGBTI persons, while the investigation into the death of human rights defender Eric
Ohena Lembembe remains at a standhill.
In Libya, the
assassination of Salwa Bouguiguis, human rights lawyer and women's
rights activist, on June 25, 2014 must not remain unpunished.
In
Mauritania, life of Aminetou Mint El Moctar, Head of the Association
des femmes chefs de familles (AFCF) is threatened since on June 6, 2014,
the leader of a Mauritanian Islamic group “Ahbab Errassoul” launched a fatwa
against her.
Last but not least, major obstacles
to the right to freedom of association were also reported on the continent,
such as for instance in Angola, Kenya, Rwanda
and Uganda.
In
Angola, in February 2015, a draft regulation on the activities of
NGOs, which is to be adopted, contains a number of provisions that would
considerably jeopardise the work of independent NGOs.
In
Kenya, the decision, on April 7, 2015, to freeze the accounts of
two human rights organisations, Haki Africa and Muslims for Human
Rights (MUHURI), in the aftermath of the terrorist attack in Garissa, comes
as an unfair retaliation measure against peaceful and legitimate human rights
organisation.
In Rwanda, there is no
independent human rights NGO left since July 2013, when the Rwandan League
for the promotion and defence of human rights (LIPRODHOR) was the target of
a takeover aiming its legitimate senior management.
In
Uganda, a new NGO bill would grant the internal affairs minister
and the National Board for Non-governmental Organisations broad powers to
supervise and dissolve all NGOs, and would impose severe criminal penalties for
violations.
Recommendations: 
1) In view of the above-mentioned
elements, States parties should immediately and unconditionally:
- Implement all the provisions of
the 1998 United Nations (UN) Declaration on Human Rights Defenders;
- Release all defenders who are
arbitrarily detained for merely exercising their rights to fundamental
freedoms;
- Put an end to all acts of
harassment - including at the judicial level - against human rights defenders;
- Order immediate, thorough,
transparent investigations into allegations of violations of human rights
defenders’ rights, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them
before an independent tribunal, and apply them the sanctions provided by the
law;
- Refrain from adopting any
provisions that do not comply with international and African human rights
standards, and abrogate or revise any such provisions that may be in force;
- Send a standing invitation to the
United Nations and ACHPR’s Special Rapporteurs on Human Rights Defenders and
facilitate their country visits.
2)
The Observatory also calls upon the ACHPR to:
- Denounce and condemn all human rights violations
faced by human rights defenders during the examination of the periodic reports
of the States parties to the ACHPR, and on the occasion of all visits conducted
in a State party;
- Increase its capacities to respond to urgent
situations faced by human rights defenders;
- Ensure the effective implementation of its
resolutions, concluding observations and decisions on communications;
- Continue and strengthen the collaboration with the
United Nations Special Rapporteur on Human Rights Defenders and with the other
regional mechanisms.
Please find the Written Intervention here: Written Intervention EN 