Turkey:  Conviction and sentencing of Ms. Sebnem Korur Fincanci, President of the Human Rights Foundation of Turkey (HRFT)
January  4, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2019 / JanuaryTurkey: Conviction and sentencing of Ms. Sebnem Korur Fincanci, President of the Human Rights Foundation of Turkey (HRFT)
TUR 001 / 0119 / OBS 001
Sentencing /
Judicial harassment
Turkey
January 4, 2019
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), requests your intervention in the following situation in Turkey.
 
Description
of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable
sources about the conviction and sentencing of Ms. Şebnem Korur Fincancı,
an academic and President of the Human Rights Foundation of Turkey (HRFT).
Since 1990, she has contributed to the access of more than 17,000 torture
survivors and their relatives to treatment and rehabilitation services in
Turkey and also in the most challenging contexts around the world.
 
According to the information received, on
December 19, 2018, the İstanbul 37th Heavy Penal Court, during its fifth
hearing, convicted and sentenced in first instance Ms. Şebnem Korur Fincancı to
two years and six months in prison for having signed a declaration entitled “We will not be a party to this crime” prepared by Academics for Peace. Other
information related to her human rights work, including interviews and a report
on human rights violations in Cizre[1]
(in the Southeastern Anatolia Region of Turkey), were also added as criminal evidence
against her in the case. This is one of the harshest sentences pronounced
against signatories of the declaration.
 
Ms. Şebnem Korur Fincancı intends to appeal
this decision as soon as the full ruling will be made public. Meanwhile the
sentence will not be enforced.
 
On January 10, 2016, 1,128 academics
published a declaration entitled "We will not be party to this crime",
calling for peace and denouncing human rights violations in the country, on
behalf of the Academics for Peace initiative. The number of signatories later
reached the total of 2,212.
 
The declaration was followed by public
comments from the authorities calling for the criminalisation of signatories
and lawsuits were then filed against some of the academics on charge of
"propagandizing for a terrorist organization" as per Article No. 7/2
of the Anti-Terror Law No. 3713. 
 
As of December 27, 2018, 444 academics had
stood trial. 69 of these academics were given sentences ranging between one
year and three months to two years and six months in prison. All but eight
sentences are suspended. 
 
The Observatory recalls that Ms. Fincancı, together
with others, is also being tried in another criminal case for taking part in a
solidarity campaign in support of the right to freedom of the press, and more
particularly for acting as symbolic co-editors of the daily Kurdish
newspaper Özgür Gündem. 
 
The Observatory condemns in the strongest terms the
sentencing of Ms. Şebnem Korur Fincancı which seems to be only aimed at
punishing her for her legitimate human rights activities, and calls on the
Turkish authorities to end any act of harassment, including at the judicial level
against all the human rights defenders in Turkey. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Turkey
asking them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the
physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Şebnem Korur Fincancı ;
ii. Put an end to all forms of harassment, including at the
judicial level, against Ms. Şebnem Korur Fincancı and against all human rights defenders in Turkey;
iii. Until all charges are dropped, ensure that all
proceedings against Ms. Şebnem Korur Fincancı are carried out in compliance with her right to a fair trial, as
protected under international law;
iv. Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN General Assembly on
December 9, 1998, in particular its Articles 1, 6(a), 9, 11 and 12.2;
vi. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards
and international instruments ratified by Turkey.
 
Addresses:
 
·      
President of Turkey, Mr. Recep Tayyip Erdoğan,
Fax: (+90 312) 525 58 31, Email: contact@tccb.gov.tr
·      
Prime Minister of Turkey, Mr. Ahmet Davutoglu,
Fax: +90 312 420 51 65
·      
Minister of Justice, Mr. Abdülhamit Gül, Fax:
+90 (0312) 419 33 70; Email: info@adalet.gov.tr    
·      
Minister of Interior, Mr. Süleyman Soylu,
Fax: +90 (312) 425 61 30
·      
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr.           Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu, Dr.  Sadık Ahmet Cad, No:            8 Balgat, Ankara, Turkey 06100.
·      
Minister of Health, Mr.            Fahrettin Koca, Email: eposta@saglik.gov.tr 
·      
President of Grand National Assembly of Turkey,
Mr. Binali Yıldırım,  Email:
binali.yildirim@tbmm.gov.tr
·      
Ambassador Izzet Selim Yenel, Diplomatic
Mission of Turkey to the European Union in Brussels, Belgium; Fax: + 32 2 511
04 50
·      
Ambassador Mr. Ali Naci Koru, Permanent
Mission of Turkey to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland; Email: mission.turkey@ties.itu.int
 
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or
embassies of Turkey in your respective country. 
 
***
Paris-Geneva, January 4, 2019
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.



[1] Civil society organization and international institutions
such as the UN Human Rights Office have reported allegations of massive
destruction, killings and numerous other serious human rights violations
committed between July 2015 and December 2016 in southeast Turkey, during
Government security operations that affected more than 30 towns and
neighbourhoods and displaced between 355,000 and half a million people, mostly
of Kurdish origin. See for instance:  https://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=21342 