Kenya:  Democratic Policing and Respect for International Human Rights Standards - Capacity building workshop for Administration Police Officers in Kenya
November 22, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kenya / 2010 / NovemberKenya: Democratic Policing and Respect for International Human Rights Standards - Capacity building workshop for Administration Police Officers in Kenya
Geneva, 22 November 2010: How respect for human
rights and effective law enforcement can go hand in hand was the subject of a workshop
for 26 officials of the Kenyan Administration Police that took place at the
Kenya School of Law in Nairobi from 25 to 29 October 2010. 
 
Organised by the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT) in partnership with the Administration Police in Kenya within
the framework of a project supported by the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur
Foundation, the workshop sought to familiarise the participants with the basic principles
of respect for human rights as an integral part of effective police work in a
democratic society. This was done within the context of Kenya’s international
human rights obligations under United Nations Human Rights Treaties with particular
reference to the recommendations made by key United Nations Treaty Bodies with
regard to improving respect for human rights in law enforcement in Kenya.
 
The workshop took place at a crucial time for
police reform in Kenya with an increasing emphasis by Government Officials and
senior Administration Police Officials on the necessity to respect human rights
in law enforcement activities. The new Kenyan Constitution, approved by
referendum on 4 August 2010 and promulgated by President Kibaki on 27 August
2010, contains a detailed Bill of Rights along with mechanisms to ensure
respect for them, including the possibility for victims of violations to
directly address the High Court for purposes of obtaining redress. The
Constitution also explicitly provides that Kenyan Police shall “comply with
constitutional standards of human rights and fundamental freedoms” and that
police staff shall be trained “to respect human rights and fundamental freedoms
and dignity”. In addition, an in-depth reform of the police in Kenya is being
carried out by the Police Reform Implementation Committee.
 
The 26 participants in the workshop were law
enforcement officers with management responsibilities from all of Kenya’s eight
regions and the purpose of the workshop was to build their capacity to
understand and act on the principles of democratic policing and respect for
human rights in their daily law enforcement activities and to enable them to
transmit that knowledge to their colleagues and the officers under their
responsibility.
 
 
 
Workshop topics
In a plenary presentation the workshop first dealt
with Kenya’s legal obligations under international human rights law with
particular attention given to selected recommendations of United Nations Treaty
Bodies with regard to law enforcement in Kenya. Then, through other plenary
presentations and working groups that focused on case studies, the participants
considered a number of specific issues related to democratic policing that were
approached from the dual perspective of international human rights standards
and how those standards can be implemented practically in the daily work of
police officers. 
 
What democratic policing means and its consequences
for law enforcement officials including issues of human rights, police
deontology and ethics was a key topic that included a discussion of examples
from police services in other countries. Other important topics dealt with were
the use of force and firearms by law enforcement officials; respect for human
rights in arrest and detention; ensuring respect for human rights in connection
with interrogations and with regard to the prevention and detection of crime,
in particular respect for human rights in connection with searches and
seizures; and maintaining public order while respecting human rights. Throughout
the workshop a main underlying theme was that, rather than hindering effective
police work, respect for human rights and the dignity of every person is in
fact an essential element to make that work successful and to create trust and confidence
between the police and the community it serves.
 
As part of the reform of the Kenya police, an
independent policing oversight authority is being prepared to monitor police
activities including respect for human rights and thus an important topic of
the workshop was ensuring effective accountability of law enforcement
officials. This included a discussion of the international rules on
accountability for law enforcement personnel and selected practices from other
countries. In this connection, there was a detailed presentation of the new
Kenyan oversight authority.
 
In light of the specific recommendations made
by United Nations Treaty Bodies concerning the need to protect particularly
vulnerable groups in Kenya, a discussion took place on protecting the human
rights of women, children and other vulnerable persons in law enforcement
activities, in particular in relation to arrest, detention and interrogations. Here,
OMCT’s work on the economic, social and cultural root causes of violence
provided a framework for the discussion and enabled participants to address the
issue of identifying and combating the use in law enforcement of subjective
grounds for interventions with regard to vulnerable persons, for example in connection
with arrest and detention.
 
The Way Forward was the topic of the final
session of the workshop. In small groups and then in plenary session, the
participants made proposals for concrete and practical measures that could be
taken to improve democratic policing and respect for human rights in the daily
activities of law enforcement officials in Kenya.
 
Opening and closing sessions
The seminar was opened on behalf of OMCT by Ms.
Anna-Lena Svensson-McCarthy, who expressed appreciation to the Administration
Police for the opportunity given to OMCT to assist in promoting respect for
human rights through democratic policing as well as for the excellent
cooperation in preparing the workshop. She then stressed that, through the new
Constitution, including its impressive Bill of Rights, the police in Kenya now
has an important tool to use, which should not be seen as an additional burden
on police activities but as a means of making the police work more effective.
Indeed, with the new Constitution, the police in Kenya could, in her view, be
considered to be the most prominent human rights defenders. In his subsequent
address to the participants, Mr. Fred Mwei, Deputy Commandant and Chief of
Planning, Training & Research, transmitted the greetings from the
Administration Police Commandant, Mr. Mbugua, and noted that he particularly
liked the reference to the police being human rights defenders. Referring to
the Bill of Rights, Mr. Mwei pointed out that it is effectively in force and
needs no implementing legislation. This meant in particular that police
officers violating the rights contained therein, including the right to be free
from torture and other forms of ill-treatment can now be taken to court and be
given stiff sentences in case of conviction. Consequently, police attitudes and
conduct had to change.
 
At the closing ceremony on 29 October, Mr. Omar
Shurie, Senior Deputy Commandant of the Administration Police and Commandant of
the Administration Police Training College, delivered a statement on behalf of
Mr. K. Mbugua, Administration Police Commandant, in which the Commandant underlined
the importance of human rights and, addressing the police officer participants,
urged them to familiarise themselves and comply with the new Constitution’s
Bill of Rights and in carrying out their mandate to pay particular attention
the vulnerable groups and less privileged in society. It was important in
returning to their respective stations, that they carry the lessons from the
workshop with a lot of seriousness and share their knowledge with workplace colleagues
and apply the skills and knowledge gained during the workshop. He also thanked
the sponsors and organisers of the workshop, the World Organisation Against
Torture, that have become important partners in helping offer better service to
the Kenyan people and in assisting the government’s reform efforts. 
 
During the closing ceremony the participants also
expressed their thanks for the knowledge and skills gained during the workshop,
undertook to apply them in their daily work and to transmit them to their
colleagues. It was clear from their enthusiasm that a successful transition had
been made from an initial perception of human rights as a hindrance to their
police work to an understanding of how respect for human rights can be an
essential and positive element in their work. 
 
Resource persons
The presentation and discussion of
the international human rights standards with regard to democratic policing and
the recommendations of the United Nations Treaty Bodies was provided by Ms.
Anna-Lena Svensson-McCarthy who was also responsible for the overall
organisation of the seminar. Mr. Klaas Stad, police officer from the
Netherlands and an experienced trainer in democratic policing, in particular
for the International Committee of the Red Cross, dealt with the seminar’s
issues from the point of view of the challenges active police officer face in
respecting human rights in their daily activities and provided information on
the approach and experiences in other countries. A presentation on human rights
from the Kenyan perspective was made by Ms Nanjala Wandibba of the Kenyan
National Human Rights and Equality Commission and Mr. Mwinyi Masoud, Senior
Superintendent, Administration Police, provided the participants with an in
depth analysis of the nature and implications for police officers of the police
reform process, including the independent policing oversight authority. 
 
For more information,
please contact Ms. Anna-Lena Svensson-McCarthy; e-mail alsm@omct.org, phone +41 (0) 22 809 49 30 and
fax +41 (0) 22 809 49 29. 