Malaysia:  Fear for the safety of Mr. Kadir bin Hashim arrested under the ISA
April  5, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Malaysia / 2011 / AprilMalaysia: Fear for the safety of Mr. Kadir bin Hashim arrested under the ISACase MYS 050411
Arbitrary arrest and detention/ Fear for the safety 
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in
the following situation in Malaysia.
Brief description of the situation
The
International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by SUARAM, a member of OMCT
SOS-Torture Network, about the arbitrary arrest and detention of Mr. Kadir bin Hashim, a
42-year-old disable man, member of Parti Keadilan Rakyat[1]
(PKR), who resides and runs a restaurant at Kampung Kerinchi, Kuala Lumpur, by
several special branch officers, in events occurred in Kampung Kerinchi, Kuala
Lumpur. OMCT is gravely concern about his safety as he was arrested and
detained under the Internal Security Act (ISA).
According
to the information received, on 1st
April 2011, at about 6.50 pm, Mr. Kadir bin
Hashim was arrested at his house by several special branch officers, who were
wearing plain clothes and ambushed the house without notifying and introducing
themselves. They reportedly also took some of Mr. Kadir bin Hashim’s belongings
without saying what they took. 
Mr.
Kadir bin Hashim was reportedly arrested under Section 73 (1) of ISA[2],
allegedly for having been involved in subversive movement. He would be detained
at Malaysian Police Headquarters. He has reportedly no access to a lawyer nor
to his family or to a doctor. The caretaker officer[3]
reportedly told the lawyers to send an official letter in order to get access
to Mr. Kadir bin Hashim, which was sent on 4
April 2011. 
The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely
concerned about the safety of Mr. Kadir bin Hashim and recalls to the
authorities of Malaysia that they are legally bound to effectively
ensure the physical and psychological integrity of all persons deprived of
liberty in accordance with international human rights law. 
OMCT further urges the competent authorities to
immediately release Mr. Kadir bin Hashim in the
absence of valid legal charges and judicial process consistent with
international legal standards, or if such charges
exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his
procedural rights at all times. OMCT has on several occasions expressed
gravest concerns over existing emergency and anti-subversion laws in Malaysia
which provide for indefinite detention without trial
in clear violation of internationally recognised human rights standards
relating to fair trials, namely the Dangerous Drugs Act 1985 (DDA), the
Emergency Ordinance 1969 (EO) and the ISA[4].
Under the ISA, individuals are deprived of many of
their fundamental human rights, such as their right to a fair and public trial,
the right to be presumed innocent until proven guilty according to law, and
their right not to be subjected to torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment. OMCT recalls that the UN Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention has urged the Government of Malaysia, following his mission to the
country, to take steps to repeal the ISA[5].

Action requested
Please write to the authorities
in Malaysia urging them to:
i.                    
Guarantee, in all
circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Kadir bin
Hashim;
ii.                  
Grant Mr. Kadir bin
Hashim prompt and unconditional access to a lawyer of his
choice and his family, as well as guarantee that he is promptly examined by
independent doctors and receives adequate and free medical care, in accordance,
inter alia, with the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners;
iii.                 
Order his immediate release
in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent with international
law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring him promptly before an
impartial, independent and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural
rights at all times;
iv.                
Carry out a prompt,
effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the arrest
and detention of Mr. Kadir bin Hashim, the result of which must
be made public, in order to bring those responsible before a competent,
independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative
sanctions as provided by law;
v.                  
Ensure the respect of human
rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with
national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
Ø      Prime Minister of Malaysia Mr. Dato' Sri Mohd Najib bin Tun Abdul Razak, Prime
Minister’s Office Malaysia, Perdana Putra Building, Federal Government
Administrative Centre, 62502 PUTRAJAYA, Selangor, Malaysia, Fax: + 60 3 8888
3444, Email: ppm@pmo.gov.my 
Ø      Malaysian Home
Affairs Minister Hishammuddin Hussein, Ministry of Home Affairs,Blok D1 & D2, Kompleks D, Pusat Pentadbiran, Kerajaan Persekutuan, 62546 Putrajaya, Fax:
03-88891613/03-88891610, Email:  hishammuddin@moha.gov.my
Ø     
Permanent Mission of Malaysia to the United Nations in Geneva,
ICC-1er/ H, Pré-Bois 20, P.O. 1834, CH-1215, Geneva 15, Switzerland, Email :
mwgeneva@ties.itu.int, Fax: +4122 710 75 01
Please also write to the embassies of Malaysia in your respective country.
Geneva, 5 April 2011.
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.



[1] The PKR is a centrist
political party in Malaysia formed in 2003 by
a merger of the National Justice Party and the older Malaysian People's Party. 


[2] Section Power to detain
suspected persons. 


[3] The officer
who is in charge of responding to any inquiries related
to Mr. Kadir bin Hashim.


[4] See for example OMCT joint press release on 1 August 2010,
www.omct.org 


[5] See the Report of the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, 8 February 2011, A/HRC/16/47/Add.2. 