Russian Federation:  Administrative harassment against Mrs. Evgenia Chirikova
February 25, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2011 / FebruaryRussian Federation: Administrative harassment against Mrs. Evgenia ChirikovaAdministrative harassment_Russia3 pages / 53 KB

URGENT APPEAL - 
THE OBSERVATORY
RUS 001 / 0211 / OBS 026
Administrative harassment
Russian Federation
February 25, 2011
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the 
following situation in the Russian Federation.
Description of the situation:
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the 
administrative harassment against Mrs. Evgenia Chirikova, leader of the Campaign for the Defence of the Khimki Forest in the 
Moscow region[1].
According to the information received, on February 21, 2011, 
employees of the Russian Child Protection Service came to the house of Mrs. 
Evgenia Chirikova in order to proceed to an inspection. She did not open the 
door. 
The employees of the service told her by phone the next day that 
their visit was allegedly in the follow-up to a letter, signed from her 
neighbours, accusing Mrs. Evgenia Chirikova of hitting and mistreating her two 4 and 9 years-old daughters. However, 
the neighbours denied having written the letter. Since the incident, Mrs. 
Evgenia Chirikova has not been taking her children to school anymore, for fear 
that they would be taken away by the Child Protection Service.
The Observatory also deplores that previously, on February 1, 2011, 
Mrs. Alla Chernysheva, active member of the same campaign, was detained in the town of 
Khimki, for allegedly holding a fake bomb to a protest rally on the same day. 
This pretext legitimated the dispersion of the rally by the authorities. She was 
released 6 hours later. 
The Observatory recalls that Mrs. Evgenia Chirikova already faced 
judicial harassment and was condemned on August 4, 2010 for “holding an 
unsanctioned rally” and “resisting the police”[2]. Moreover, throughout the past year, other environmental activists 
have been threatened and journalists covering the Khimki project have been 
brutally beaten.
The Observatory condemns the administrative harassment against Mrs. 
Evgenia Chirikova through the use of the Russian Child Protection Service, as 
well as the ongoing judicial harassment and threats faced by the environmental 
activists, which seem to merely aim at silencing their work and hindering their 
human rights activities.
Actions requested:
Please write to the authorities of Russian Federation, urging them 
to: 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological 
integrity of Mrs. Evgenia Chirikova and Mrs. Alla Chernysheva as well as of all 
activists of the Campaign for the Defence of the Khimki Forest and all human 
rights defenders in the Russian Federation;
ii. Put an end to any act of harassment - including at the 
administrative and judicial level - against Ms. Evgenia Chirikova and Mrs. Alla 
Chernysheva as well as against all human rights defenders in the Russian 
Federation, and ensure in all circumstances that they are able to carry out 
their legitimate activities without any hindrance and fear of reprisals; 

iii. Comply with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on 
Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, 
especially 
-          its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the 
protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the 
national and international levels”;
-          its Article 6 (b) and (c) which states that “Everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others, as provided for in human rights and 
other applicable international instruments, freely to publish, impart or 
disseminate to others views, information and knowledge on all human rights and 
fundamental freedoms;  to study, discuss, form and hold opinions on the 
observance, both in law and in practice, of all human rights and fundamental 
freedoms and, through these and other appropriate means, to draw public 
attention to those matters”;
-          its Article 8 which provides that “Everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, 
to have effective access, on a non-discriminatory basis, to participation in the 
government of his or her country and in the conduct of public affairs. This includes, inter alia, the right, individually 
and in association with others, to submit to governmental bodies and agencies 
and organizations concerned with public affairs criticism and proposals for 
improving their functioning and to draw attention to any aspect of their work 
that may hinder or impede the promotion, protection and realization of human 
rights and fundamental freedoms.
-          and its Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all 
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of 
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, 
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or 
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of 
the rights referred to in the present Declaration”; 
iv. Comply with the provisions of the Declaration of the Committee of 
Ministers of the Council of Europe on the protection of human rights defenders 
and the promotion of their activities, and in particular With Article 2.i), in 
which the Committee calls on member States to “create an environment conducive 
to the work of human rights defenders, enabling individuals, groups and 
associations to freely carry out activities, on a legal basis, consistent with 
international standards, to promote and strive for the protection of human 
rights and fundamental freedoms without any restrictions other than those 
authorised by the European Convention on Human Rights;;
v. More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human 
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments 
ratified by the Russian Federation. 
Addresses: 
· Mr. Dmitri Medvedev, President of the Russian Federation, 
Ilinka Str, 23, Moscow, 103132,  Moscow, Russian Federation, 
Faxes:+ 7 495 606 5173 / 630 2408
· Minister of Internal Affairs, Mr. Rashid Nurgaliev, ul. Zhitnaya, 16, 
117049 Moscow, Russian Federation, Telegram: Rossiia, 117049, Moskva, Fax: + 7 
495 637 49 25 
· Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Smolenskaya-Sennaya 
pl, 32/34, 121200 Moscow, Russian Federation, Telegram: Fax:+ 7 495 644 2203 

· Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the United Nations in 
Geneva Av. de la Paix 15, CH-1211, Geneva 20, Switzerland, e-mail : mission.russian@ties.itu.int, Fax: +4122 734 40 44 
· Embassy of the Russian Federation in Brussels, 31-33 boulevard du 
Régent, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 513 76 49. 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the Russian 
Federation in your respective country. 
*** Paris-Geneva, February 25, 2011 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this 
appeal in your reply.
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org  Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11 / +33 1 43 55 18 
80Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 
29 