Finalists for the Martin Ennals Award 2016 for Human Rights Defenders are Zone 9 Bloggers, Ilham Tohti and Razan Zaitouneh
April 27, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2016 / AprilFinalists for the Martin Ennals Award 2016 for Human Rights Defenders are Zone 9 Bloggers, Ilham Tohti and Razan Zaitouneh
The Human Rights
Defenders selected as Finalists for the Martin Ennals Award 2016 are: 
Zone 9 Bloggers (Ethiopia)





















 
Kality prison in
Ethiopia, which holds many journalists and political prisoners, has 8 zones.
Zone 9 selected their name as a symbol for Ethiopia as a whole where political
freedoms are severely restricted. They write opinion pieces and feature
articles that focus on the constitution, economic, educational and cultural
issues. They document human rights abuses and violations of law by both state
and non-state actors. Furthermore, they shed light on the situation of
political prisoners in Ethiopia. Two weeks after creating their blog, it was
blocked. Two years later six of its members were arrested and charged with
terrorism. Although they have now been released, three are in exile while those
still in Ethiopia are banned from travel.They stated: “We are extremely
humbled to be nominated for the Martin Ennals Award. This recognition raises
our visibility enough to increase our safety, and also shows that the World is
the home of the same family. It is proof that when one part of the world is
silenced, the rest will speak on behalf of it. This recognition will definitely
motivate us to push forward on our struggle to create a better Ethiopia where
human rights are respected.”
Ilham Tohti (China)




 
A renowned Uyghur
intellectual in China, he has worked for two decades to foster dialogue and
understanding between Uyghurs and Han Chinese. He has rejected separatism and
sought reconciliation based on a respect for Uyghur culture. Beginning in 1994,
he began to write about problems and abuses in Xinjiang, which led to official surveillance.
From 1999 to 2003 he was barred from teaching, after posting information on
Uyghurs who had been arrested, killed and “disappeared” during and after
protests. Ilham Tohti was arrested on January 15, 2014. He was charged with
separatism and sentenced to life imprisonment after a two-day trial.
 
From his daughter, “My father Ilham Tohti has used only one
weapon in his struggle for the basic rights of the Uyghurs of Xinjiang: Words.
Spoken, written, distributed, and posted. This is all he has ever had at his
disposal, and all that he has ever needed. And this is what China found so
threatening. A person like him doesn't deserve to be in prison for even a day.”

 
Razan Zaitouneh (Syria)




 
A prominent human
rights lawyer, activist, and journalist in Syria, Razan has dedicated her life
to defending political prisoners, documenting crimes against humanity, and
helping others free themselves from oppression. This resulted in a travel ban
in 2002. Following the beginning of the conflict in 2011, she founded the
Violations Documentation Center (VDC), which documents the death toll and
ill-treatment in Syria's prisons. With the VDC, she compiled lists of the
detained, the executed, and the disappeared. On December 9, 2013, a group of
masked gunmen stormed the VDC office in Douma, near Damascus, and kidnapped
Razan along with her husband, Wael Hamada, and two colleagues. Their
whereabouts remain unknown.
 
Her sister, Rana
Zaitouneh said, "Despite her
absence, Razan continues to make an impact, inspiring others to stand against
their oppressors in the quest for freedom. Her allegiance is to freedom from
oppression and fear. And now her own freedom has been taken. Her voice has been
silenced. Razan has always believed that all people are equal. She was
determined that no one should be forgotten. I am resolved that she will not be
forgotten."
 
The Award will be
presented on October 11th at a ceremony hosted by the City of
Geneva.
 
The main award of the
human rights movement. The Martin Ennals Award for Human Rights Defenders (MEA) is a unique
collaboration among ten of the world’s leading human rights organisations. It
is given to human rights defenders who have shown deep commitment and courage
in the face of personal risk. The aim of the award is to highlight their work
and protect them through increased visibility. The Jury is composed of the
following NGOs: - Amnesty International,- Human Rights Watch,- Human Rights First,- FIDH,- World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT),- Front Line Defenders,- International Commission of Jurists,- EWDE Germany,- International Service for Human Rights,- HURIDOCS.For further information, please contact: Michael Khambatta +41 79 474
8208
khambatta@martinennalsaward.org or visit www.martinennalsaward.org 