Turkey:  Provisional release of Mr. Orhan Kemal Cengiz and travel ban against him
July 26, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2016 / JulyTurkey: Provisional release of Mr. Orhan Kemal Cengiz and travel ban against himNew Information
TUR 006 / 0716 / OBS
063.1
Provisional release /
Restrictions to freedom of movement
Turkey
July
26, 2016
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent intervention in
the following situation in Turkey.
New information:
The Observatory has been informed by reliable
sources about the provisional release of
Mr. Orhan Kemal Cengiz, a human rights lawyer[1],
a journalist who writes on various human rights issues and founding member and
former President of the Human Rights Agenda Association (Insan Haklari
Gundemi Dernegi – HRAA)[2]. As a journalist, Orhan Kemal
Cengiz published articles on various newspapers including Today's Zaman,
Radikal, Al-Monitor, Ozgur Dusunce and Bugun.
According to the information received, on July 24, 2016, the Prosecutor ordered the provisional release of
Orhan Kemal Cengiz and issued a travel ban against him, pending the end of the
investigation. 
During his interrogation, the Prosecutor informed Orhan Kemal Cengiz that he was investigated
within the framework of a criminal case regarding
Muhammed Fethullah Gülen’s alleged terrorist organisation. Orhan Kemal Cengiz
was questioned about a few tweets posted on his Twitter account. 
The Observatory welcomes the release of Orhan Kemal Cengiz but deplores
his continuing judicial harassment, which seems to merely aim at sanctioning
his human rights activities. 
Until all charges are dropped, the Observatory calls upon the Turkish
authorities to cancel the travel ban and ensure that any judicial proceeding
against him are carried out in full compliance with his right to a fair trial,
as protected under international law. 
Background information:
Since July 2015, the Turkish authorities have launched a massive
crackdown on some civil society organisations abusively depicted as “terrorist
networks”. The campaign targeted dozens of peaceful activists who have been
involved in the monitoring of human rights violations resulting from
anti-terrorism operations and who have been advocating for a peaceful
resolution of the Kurdish issue, including NGO members, lawyers, political party
representatives and journalists.
On July 17, 2016, Mr. Orhan Kemal Cengiz was mentioned on a blacklist of
“dissent journalists” to be detained soon, published on the pro-Government Twitter
account known as Başkentçi.
On July 21, 2016, Mr. Orhan Kemal Cengiz and his wife, Ms. Sibel
Semira Hurtas[3],
were arrested by the police at Istanbul’s Ataturk international airport, before
boarding for a plane to London to attend a conference promoted by the Tahir
Elci Foundation and placed in police custody. Sibel Semira Hurtas was released
on the same day, while Orhan Kemal Cengiz was detained in Istanbul Security
Directorate located on Vatan Avenue. 
Actions requested:
Please write to the authorities of Turkey asking them to:
i.              
Drop all the charges
against Mr. Orhan Kemal Cengiz, and ensure that any judicial proceedings
against him are carried out in full compliance with the defendant's right to a
fair trial, as protected under international law;
ii.             
Put an end to the travel
ban imposed against Mr. Orhan Kemal Cengiz;
iii.           
Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Orhan Kemal
Cengiz as well as of all human rights defenders in Turkey;
iv.            
Put an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level,
against Mr. Orhan Kemal Cengiz and all human rights defenders in Turkey, so that they are able to carry out their work
without hindrance;
v.             
Comply with all the
provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in
particular with its Articles 1, 6(b)(c) and 12.2;
vi.            
Ensure in all
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with international human rights standards and international instruments
ratified by Turkey. 
Addresses:
· President of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Fax: +90 (312) 525 58 31,
E-mail: contact@tccb.gov.tr
·
Prime Minister of Turkey Ahmet
Davutoglu, Fax:  +90 (312) 403
62 82
·
Minister of Justice of Turkey, Mr. Bekir Bozdağ, Fax: +90 (0312) 419 33
70; E-mail: info@adalet.gov.tr
· Minister of Interior of Turkey, Mr. Efkan
Ala; Fax: +90 (312) 425 61 30; Email: ozelkalem@icisleri.gov.tr
· Ambassador Izzet Selim Yenel, Diplomatic Mission of Turkey to the
European Union in Brussels, Belgium; Fax: + 32 2 511 04 50
· Ambassador Mehmet Ferden Çarikçi, Permanent Mission of Turkey to the
United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 734 08 59; Email: mission.turkey@ties.itu.int
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Turkey in
your respective country.


[1]                 He is one of the lawyers in the “Tahir Elci” case, a Kurdish human
rights lawyer and President of the Diyarbakir Bar Association killed in
November 2015. In February 2016, he spoke at the Geneva Summit for Human
Rights, devoting his entire speech to the memory of Mr. Tahir Elci.


[2]                 The HRAA was established in 2003 in order to work at the national and
international levels on human rights violations, especially on torture, freedom
of expression, minority rights and economic, social and cultural rights. 


[3]                 Ms. Sibel Semira
Hurtas is a journalist specialising in women's rights and State crimes. 