Contribution to the 49th ordinary session of the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights
May  5, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2011 / MayContribution to the 49th ordinary session of the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights

WRITTEN INTERVENTION – THE OBSERVATORY

  
AFRICAN COMMISSION ON HUMAN AND PEOPLES’
RIGHTS 
 
 49th Ordinary Session 
 
Banjul, Republic of The Gambia
 
May 2011
 
  Contribution of 
the International Federation for Human
Rights (FIDH) and 
the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT)
 
 Within the framework of their joint
programme,
the Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders    
 
 Under the agenda item: 
“Situation of Human Rights Defenders”
 

The International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), in the framework of their joint programme, the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, express their deep concern about the
situation of human rights defenders who continue to work for the respect,
promotion and defence of human rights for all on the African continent in a
hostile and dangerous environment.
 
While it is true that in many cases the
women and men who are in the front line defending human rights are better
protected than when the United Nations Declaration on Defenders was adopted in
1998, in particular thanks to the introduction of alert and protection
mechanisms at national and regional level, they are also under greater threat
owing to their constant achievements. With the help of specific programmes such
as the Observatory, which has accompanied them for over 14 years, human rights
defenders have been able to make themselves heard at national level, and in
forums and regional and international organisations. They continue to be active
in a great variety of areas, such as economic, social and cultural rights,
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender rights (LGBT), the fight against
corruption and the fight against impunity. Thanks to their efforts, considerable
progress has been made in obtaining that human rights be recognised as being of
prime importance in the exercise of power and the resolution of conflicts. The
African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights (ACHPR) has made a major
contribution to such developments, in particular by adopting several
resolutions for the promotion and protection of human rights defenders in
Africa, and by keeping the matter constantly under review in its activities and
agenda. 
 
In North Africa, the early part of the year 2011 has been marked by a
succession of social protests that reflected the peoples’ aspiration for social
and political reforms, in order to fully enjoy universally recognised rights
and fundamental freedoms. These events highlighted the great importance of
having a strong and recognised civil society for channelling the peoples’
demands and conveying them to those in power. From Sidi Bouzid in Tunisia, in
December 2010, to Cairo a few weeks later, the wave of massive social protests
spread to neighbouring countries, such as Libya and Algeria. This surge of
protest has affected Zimbabwe, where 46 people were arrested last February for
having watched a video of the social protest movements in Tunisia and Egypt,
and elsewhere. In their fear of further social protest movements calling for
respect for fundamental freedoms, some countries have indeed intensified their
repression, especially against human rights defenders.
 
Despite these favourable developments, enormous challenges still lie
ahead for the promotion and protection of defenders, who are still being
severely persecuted in numerous countries. In this respect, the Observatory is
concerned at the multiplication of violations against human rights defenders
committed by State and non-State actors, most often in impunity.
 
Restrictions to the
freedom of association
 
Legislation and
administrative practices designed to restrict the freedom of association
 
In some States parties there is little or no space in which the freedom
of association can develop.
 
In Libya, where for several weeks there has been fighting, independent human
rights groups and movements are still unable to form associations openly, as
the setting up of an association requires prior administrative authorisation
that is hardly ever given when the activity of the association is to defend
human rights. In June 2009, the General People’s Congress adopted Decision
312/2009 by which all new organisations have to give 30 days’ notice for a
public meeting or event, and have to communicate to the authorities the full
list of participants and the issues to be addressed. Under Law No. 71 and the
Criminal Code any person belonging to a “forbidden group” is punished by death.
Likewise,
 
In Algeria, the authorities still refuse to grant legal recognition to human
rights organisations, as in the case of SOS Disappeared (SOS Disparus) and the Mich’al Association of Children of Jijel Disappeared (Association Mich’al des
enfants de disparus de Jijel - AMEDJ).
 
In Tunisia, the transition authorities have announced several measures designed to
guarantee respect for the rule of law and fundamental freedoms. In this
context, on February 26, 2011, the Tunis Administrative Court cancelled a 1999
decision by the Ministry of the Interior opposing the establishment of the
National Council for Liberties in Tunisia (Conseil national pour les libertés en Tunisie - CNLT). On January 15, 2011, access to the premises of the branches and
headquarters of the Tunisian Human Rights League (Ligue tunisienne des droits de l'Homme - LTDH) was restored. And on April 16, 2011, LTDH was able to hold its
congress for the first time since 2005, in the Hammamet section. The
Association for the Fight Against Torture in Tunisia (Association de lutte
contre la torture en Tunisie - ALTT), which
until now the Tunisian Government had considered to be illegal, on February 18,
2011 filed with the Ministry of the Interior a new application for registration
under the name of Organisation Against Torture in Tunisia (Organisation contre la
torture en Tunisie - OCTT). In the absence of any response within three months, OCTT will de facto
be established legally.
 
Smear campaigns, legal
harassment and administrative sanctions
 
In Zimbabwe, in recent months, Mr. Abel Chikomo, Executive Director of
the Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum (Forum), was
questioned repeatedly by the police on the Forum’s activities, in particular
about a campaign against torture, a national enquiry on transitional justice
and several press releases published in 2011 on the resurgence of political
violence. On February 9, 2011, the Machipisa police in Harare arrested two
Forum investigators, and questioned them about their work. They were finally
released after receiving the assurance that the Director, Mr. Chikomo, would
report the next morning to the Machipisa police station. On March 30, 2011,
during his last summons to the directorate of the Harare criminal police, Mr.
Chikomo was accused of “managing and controlling the operations of an illegal
voluntary organisation”, on the basis of Article 6 (3) of the Private Voluntary
Organisations Act (PVO Act). He was allowed to return home the same day, on
condition he would report again to the police station the next day.
 
In Burundi, on October 20, 2011, at a meeting in his
office in the presence of representatives of several NGOs, the Minister of the
Interior addressed the question of the cancellation of the approval of the
Burundi Association for the Protection of Human Rights and Detained Persons (Association burundaise
pour la protection des droits humains et des personnes détenues - APRODH) and the replacement of
its President, Mr. Pierre-Claver
Mbonimpa. On the same day, a press conference was held by the
national police Spokesman in the offices of the police directorate during which
the President of APRODH was reportedly accused of supporting armed bandits. On
January 28, 2011, after more than a year of tense relations between the Forum
for the Strengthening of Civil Society (Forum pour le renforcement de la société civile - FORSC)[1] and the Government, the Ministry of the Interior ordered
the rehabilitation of the Forum, whose approval had been withdrawn on November
23, 2009 by the Ministry of the Interior on the grounds that its application
was not in order, although it had been approved by the same ministry in 2006.
 


Repression of peaceful demonstrations and social protest movements: the
security of defenders threatened
 
Restrictions to the freedom of
peaceful assembly
 
In Cameroon,
on November 11, 2010, Mr. Jean-Marc Bikoko,
President of the Public Sector Trade Union (Centrale syndicale du
secteur public - CSP), Mr. Maurice Angelo Phouet Foe, Secretary
General of the National Autonomous Education and Training Trade Union (Syndicat national autonome de l'éducation et
la formation - SNAEF), Mr. Theodore
Mbassi Ondoa, Executive Secretary of the Cameroon Federation of Education
Trade Unions (Fédération camerounaise des
syndicats de l’éducation - FECASE), Mr. Joseph Ze, Secretary General of the United National Trade Union of
Teachers and Professors of Teacher Training Establishments (Syndicat national unitaire des instituteurs
et professeurs des écoles normales - SNUIPEN), Mr. Eric Nla’a, a CSP
accountant, and Messrs. Nkili Effoa and
Claude Charles Felein, members of
SNUIPEN, were arrested by the police during a peaceful demonstration organised
by CSP in order to convey to the Prime minister a memorandum drawn up by the
public sector workers and addressed to the President, relating in particular to
improvements to the workers’ conditions. The seven trade union leaders, who
were unable to have access to their lawyer, were brought before the Prosecutor
the next morning. On November 12, 2010, they were released by the Public
Prosecutor, who told them that they would have to appear before the Yaoundé
First Instance Court to face charges of “organising an illegal demonstration”
and “disturbing the public peace”. After several postponements, the case has
still not been heard. A new hearing is scheduled for May 16, 2011.
 
In Burkina Faso, according to
information received by the Burkinabe Movement for Human and Peoples’ Rights (Mouvement burkinabé des
droits de l’Homme et des peuples - MBDHP),
students’ demonstrations organised in several cities to protest against the
behaviour of certain elements of the police, to call for truth and justice
regarding the assassination of a schoolchild in the Central-West region, and to
say no to the culture of impunity, were repressed by the police, who fired real
bullets. The toll at present is five killed and several dozens wounded. In this
context, Mr. Chrysogone
Zougmoré, MBDHP President, received threats from
certain elements of the national gendarmerie. He was summoned on March 10, 2011
to the investigation section of the national gendarmerie to “receive a notification”,
and was accused of having encouraged, even organised the demonstrations through
the local sections of the organisation. Representatives of the gendarmerie
declared to the MBDHP representative that the organisation would be held
responsible for any material or human damage sustained owing to the
demonstrations.
 
Repression against
Tunisian defenders in the framework of the “Jasmine Revolution”
 
In December 2010 and January 2011, a wave of arrests and intimidation
measures hit several human rights defenders, in particular lawyers and
journalists denouncing violations committed by the law enforcement agencies
during the repression against the national social protest movement against the
lack of social justice, corruption and lack of respect for fundamental
freedoms. On December 28, 2010, lawyers. Abderraouf Ayadi,
in charge of CNLT legal affairs, and Chokri Belaîd
were arrested and then unconditionally released the next morning. Earlier
during the day, the two lawyers had addressed a lawyers’ demonstration
organised in front of the Tunis Law Courts to denounce the violent repression
against social movements in the country. On December 29, 2010, in Jendouba, Mr.
Mouldi
Zouabi, a journalist with Radio Kalima and
correspondent of Al-Quds
Al-Arabi and Al-Arabyya,
was arrested while covering a gathering of lawyers, and then unconditionally
released eight hours later. Furthermore, Mr. Ammar Amroussia,
Al-Badil correspondent, was arrested the same day in Gafsa. Following these
events, the President of the Tunis Bar, Mr. Abderrazaq Kilani, and the Tunis
Bar Association called for a peaceful demonstration of lawyers on December 31
in several cities, which was violently put down by the police, in particular in
Tunis, Gafsa, Sfax, Mahdia, Grombalia and Monastir. In addition, on January 11,
2011, the peaceful demonstration of artists expressing their support for the
social protest movement in front of the Tunis municipal theatre was violently
repressed and dispersed by numerous plainclothes and uniformed policemen. Several
lawyers who took part in the demonstration were assaulted by police officers.
On January 13, 2011, lawyer  Mohammed Mezam was detained in solitary confinement in the Ministry of the Interior
until his release on January 14, 2011.
 
Following the fall of President Ben Ali on January 14, 2011, journalist Fahem Boukaddous and activist Hassan Ben Abdallah, a member of the local committee of the unemployed in Redeyef, who had
been detained respectively since six and 11 months, were released on January
19, as promised by the Transitional Government. Furthermore, on February 16,
2011, following the adoption of a general amnesty law, all human rights
defenders were released[2].
 
Resonance of the
“Jasmine Revolution”: targeted repression against Egyptian and Algerian
defenders
 
In Egypt, human rights defenders giving legal, judiciary, social or humanitarian
assistance to the demonstrators were arrested, and their means of communication
impeded. On February 3, 2011, 30 defenders were arrested by the military police
and held for over 24 hours in an unidentified place, where police officers
enjoined them to stop supporting the demonstrators, at times ill-treating them.
Lawyers of the Hisham Mubarak Law Centre (HMLC), voluntary workers with the
Front to Defend Egypt Protestors and members of Amnesty International and Human
Rights Watch were among the persons detained: Messrs. Ahmed Seif al-Islam
Hamad, Mohsen Besheer
and
Mostafa al-Hassan, as well as Ms. Mona al-Masry, Mr. Daniel
Williams, Ms. Fatma Abada,
Mr. Saeed
Hadadi and Mr. Khaled Ali,
and Mr. Mohamed
al-Taher and Ms. Shahenda Abushadi,
Ms.
Nadine Abushadi and Ms. Nada Sadek.
During their detention, the defenders were harassed by military security
agents, and some were subjected to ill-treatments. In addition, the cell
phones, cameras and computers of some of them were destroyed by members of the
military police. All the defenders arrested on February 3 were released between
February 4 and 6.
 
In Algeria, acts of intimidation were committed when several trade unions, political
parties, human rights organisations and civil society organisations, including
the Algerian League for the Defence of Human Rights (Ligue algérienne pour la défense des droits de
l'Homme - LADDH), announced the creation of a National
Coordination for Change and Democracy (Coordination
nationale pour le changement et la démocratie - CNCD), and called
for a peaceful march on February 12. The aim of the march was to call for the
lifting of the state of emergency that had been in force since 1992, the
release of persons detained for their participation in the demonstrations, and
an opening up of the political and media arena. On February 7, the Algiers
Wilaya announced that it refused to authorise the march for “reasons of public
order”. CNCD however decided to exercise its right to peaceful assembly all the
same, and maintained the February 12 event. On February 11, 2011, Messrs. Kateb
Said, Akrem El Kebir, Chouicha
Sihem, Ait Tayab Hassan and Bouha
Yacine, young activists belonging to the Oran branch of LADDH, were arrested while
distributing flyers calling for the February 12 gathering. They were
questioned, and then released two hours later. In addition, a large force of
uniformed and plainclothes police was deployed around the LADDH headquarters in
Algiers and Oran, and stayed there all day.
 


Arrest of defenders in
connection with their support for peaceful demonstrations
 
In Sudan,
human rights defenders were arrested in a context of peaceful social protests
organised by young activists calling for democracy and respect for human
rights, which began on January 30, 2011. These demonstrations were violently
repressed by national security forces. In ten days, more than a hundred
demonstrators were arrested, and some of them were subjected to acts of torture
and ill treatment by the National Intelligence and Security Services (NISS). On
February 3, 2011, Mr. Ahmed Mahmoud Ahmed, a student activist, blogger and rapper, was arrested by NISS in
Khartoum Bari, and then released on February 15, after having been tortured. On
February 9, Mr. Abdelazim Mohamed Ahmed, Director of the Khartoum
branch of the Easter Centre for Culture and Legal Aid, was also arrested by
NISS, and held in solitary confinement until his release on February 13, 2011.
 
Likewise, in Djibouti, on February 9, 2011, Mr. Jean-Paul
Noël Abdi, President of
the Djibouti League of Human Rights (Ligue
djiboutienne des droits humains - LDDH), was arrested by members
of the national gendarmerie and taken to their headquarters in Djibouti-city.
On the same day, Mr. Jean-Paul Noël Abdi and Mr. Farah
Abadid Heldid, a LDDH member arrested on February 5, were brought
before the Public Prosecutor and accused of “participating in an insurgency
movement”, in connection with their supposed support for the students’ movement
and the demonstrations that started in December 2010, which had been violently
put down. During the month of December 2010, Mr. Jean-Paul Noël Abdi had
denounced the repression by the Djibouti authorities against the demonstrations[3]. On
February 9, 2011, Mr. Jean-Paul Noël Abdi was
released temporarily for reasons of health[4]. Mr.
Farah Abadid Heldid (still detained) and Mr. Noël Abdi are liable to up to
fifteen years’ imprisonment and a fine of 7,000,000 Djibouti Francs (approx.
27,404 Euros).
 
The safety of human
rights defenders is in an alarming situation
 
On the continent, murders and other attacks on human rights defenders’
right to life and physical integrity are still a major problem, particularly
since they generally remain unpunished. The lack of independence of some
national judiciary systems prevents victims and the human rights organisations
that represent them from obtaining justice and breaking the cycle of violence,
so encouraging new acts of violence to be committed.
 
Impunity
for acts of violence against human rights defenders
 
The
various investigations that are under way in the Democratic Republic of Congo
(DRC) and in Burundi following the murder of human rights defenders have not always
permitted the full chain of criminal responsibility to be established. 
 
In DRC, the trial for the murders on
June 1, 2010 of Mr. Floribert Chebeya Bazire and Mr. Fidèle Bazana,
respectively
President and member of Voice of the Voiceless (Voix des sans voix -
VSV), opened on November 12, 2010 before the Kinshasa-Gombe Military Court. Despite numerous appeals made by
the Congolese civil society and the international community, the trial opened
although the investigation does not seem to have been carried out in conditions
likely to guarantee its independence and impartiality. Furthermore, despite the
arrest of several police officers, the main suspect, John Numbi Tambo,
Inspector General of the national police, was not charged and appeared as a
simple witness. In
addition, since the death and disappearance of the two defenders, their
families have been victims of intimidation and put under considerable pressure.
Messrs.
Chebeya and Bazana are included in a long list of defenders who have died, have been threatened,
harassed, arrested and pursued in recent years because of their human rights
activities. Impunity for the authors of these crimes continues and feeds the
cycle of violence against them.
 
In Burundi,
the basis of the case relating to the murder, during the night of April 8 - 9,
2009, of Mr. Ernest Manirumva, Vice-President of the Anti-Corruption and
Economic Malpractice Observatory (Observatoire de lutte contre la corruption
et les malversations économiques - OLUCOME), has still not been examined,
two years after the facts and in spite of constant pressure from the Burundi
civil society and the international community. Several of the people involved
in planning and/or carrying out the operation that led to the murder of Mr.
Ernest Manirumva have never been questioned or troubled in spite of testimony
or evidence linking them to the case. During the months preceding his murder,
Mr. Ernest Manirumva was investigating a case related to trafficking within the
army and the national police. His murder appeared to be directly linked to his
investigation into this case, and it is to be feared that the political
implications of the case may have impeded the judicial proceedings. It is in
this context that acts of harassment and death threats against human rights
defenders who fight against impunity are on the increase in the country,
especially against the President OLUCOME Mr. Gabriel Rufyiri and his
family, and also against Mr. Claver Irambona, a member of OLUCOME.
Additionally, on April 8, 2011, two years after the murder of Ernest Manirumva,
a police column stopped a peaceful march organised in Bujumbura by the
Burundian NGOs, in the framework of a campaign calling for light to be shed on
the exact circumstances of this murder and for those responsible to be
prosecuted and tried. Messrs. Gabriel Rufyiri and Claver Irambona were arrested
and held at the Special Bureau of Investigation before being unconditionally
released a few hours later. 

 
In Uganda, the community of human rights
defenders was in mourning following the murder of one of its prominent members.
On January 26, 2011, Mr. David Kato, who was responsible for advocacy
within the organisation Sexual Minorities Uganda (SMUG), was beaten to death
at his home near Kampala by an unidentified man. Mr. David Kato succumbed to
his injuries while he was being transferred to Kawolo hospital. A suspect was
arrested on February 17, 2011 and the Observatory hopes that the investigation
will be able to establish the responsibilities of those who have encouraged
acts of violence to be committed against defenders working on LGBT rights. Mr.
David Kato had received death threats following the publication in 2010 in the Rolling
Stone newspaper of the photos, names and addresses of several people who
were presented as homosexuals. The photo of Mr. David Kato appeared on the
first page of one of the editions, under the headline “Hang them!”. After he
filed a complaint, on December 30, 2010, the Supreme Court ordered the
newspaper to stop publishing the photos as such publication constituted an
attack on the right to privacy. Homosexuality is illegal in Uganda and is punishable by
a maximum fourteen-year prison sentence. In October 2009, a Member of
Parliament presented a draft anti-homosexuality law to make the crime of
homosexuality punishable by life imprisonment and by capital punishment in the
case of a second offence. Despite being condemned by the civil society, this
draft law may come under discussion again in the coming months. 
 
In The Gambia, the absence of any investigation into the murder of the journalist Deyda Hydara in 2004, the enforced
disappearance of the journalist Ebrima Manneh since 2006 and the threats made against human rights
defenders by the President of the Republic in September 2009 prevent the
constitution of an independent civil society by maintaining a climate of fear
amongst the community of human rights defenders.
 

Threats against defenders
working on economic, social and cultural rights and on sexual minorities
 
On March 10, 2011, during a press conference organised
by the Congo Business Federation (Fédération des Entreprises du Congo -
FEC) in Goma, the organisers and the city Mayor publicly threatened Ms. Justine
Masika Bihamba, Coordinator of the Association of Women for the Victims
of Sexual Violence (Synergie des Femmes pour les Victimes des Violences
Sexuelles - SFVS). On the same day, two unknown persons waited for her
daughter in front of her home and snatched her passport and digital camera from
her, then ran away. On March 14, 2011, a Senator from North Kivu province also
publicly attacked Ms. Masika Bihamba and the SFVS. These threats occurred after
SFVS sent a letter dated March 7, 2011 addressed to the United States Secretary
of State, Ms. Hillary Clinton, asking the American State Department to support
the application of a law requiring oil, gas and mining companies to inform the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) when they obtained cassiterite, coltan,
wolframite and gold from DRC or a neighbouring country. Furthermore, on
December 27, 2010, a military audit magistrate from Goma called Ms. Masika
Bihamba and notified her that he had received the order to arrest her after she
appeared in the TV5 television programme “What if you told me the whole
truth” (“Et
si vous me disiez toute la vérité”) on November 28, 2010, during which she
spoke about the general human rights situation in North Kivu, impunity, cases
of sexual violence and the human rights violations perpetrated by General Bosco
Ntaganda, who is the subject of an international arrest warrant for war crimes
issued by the International Criminal Court (ICC).

 
In Cameroon, defenders of the rights of sexual minorities, of the right to choose
gender identity and sexual orientation and defenders who fight against HIV/AIDS
infection work in an environment of latent hostility that is encouraged by the
authorities’ statements. Since December 22,
2010, the Association for the Defence of Homosexuality (Association de défense de l’hom 