Libya:  30th session of the Human Rights Council (HRC30): Joint Statement: Libya's UPR Review
September 25, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / Libya / 2015 / SeptemberLibya: 30th session of the Human Rights Council (HRC30): Joint Statement: Libya's UPR ReviewLibya_2015.09.25_HRC30_Joint_UPR_General1 page / 668 KBUnited Nations Human Rights Council:  30th Session
Oral Intervention- Item 6:  UPR of Libya
25 September 2015
 
Delivered by:  Mr. Hassan Al-Amine
 
Mr. President,
CIHRS and OMCT in cooperation with the Libyan Coalition for the UPR welcomes
the government of Libya’s stated commitment to the UPR process and its
acceptance of most recommendations. However, we remain concerned at the lack of
concrete and serious steps to implement these recommendations.
 
In this context, we
call on the Libyan authorities to adopt a four-year national action plan to
ensure the implementation of its UPR recommendations and to ensure consultation
and cooperation with all stakeholders, including civil society, during its
formation and application. 
 
The human rights and the humanitarian situation in Libya continues to
deteriorate across the country.  Militias
and paramilitary groups on all sides of the current conflict continue to commit
grave violations that could amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity.  Violations include direct and indiscriminate attacks against civilians
and civilian infrastructure, unlawful killings, torture and ill-treatment in
official and illegal detention facilities, arbitrary arrests, abductions,
enforced disappearances, and forced displacement. These violations are fueled
in large part by an almost total lack of effective accountability mechanisms
within the country.  
 We further call for concrete and effective
steps to be taken to remedy the obstacles that will hinder the implementation of
UPR recommendations. Namely, the widespread lack of accountability for serious
crimes committed by all armed factions and the failure to form a coherent
vetting process for security institutions.  Furthermore, Libyan authorities have failed to
establish a mechanism for transitional justice and in doing so have denied truth
and reconciliation to Libyan citizens. The Libyan authorities should not delay
their efforts to remedy these failures or seek to justify them under the
pretext of “protecting revolutionary gains” or “the fight against terrorism”. 
Public commitments and recommendations are not enough, and time is
running out.  Unless real, on-the-ground,
progress is made to provide for the rule of law, democratic governance and
basic freedoms then a durable peaceful solution to the current crises will
likely remain a distant dream.  
 
Thank you Mr.
President. 