Egypt:  Ongoing harassment of El Nadeem Center for the Rehabilitation for Victims of Violence and Torture
April  6, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2016 / AprilEgypt: Ongoing harassment of El Nadeem Center for the Rehabilitation for Victims of Violence and TortureNew
information
EGY 001
/ 0216 / OBS 019.2
Harassment
/
Restrictions
to freedom of association
Egypt
April 6, 2016
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Egypt.
New
information:
The Observatory has been
informed by reliable sources about the ongoing harassment of El Nadeem Center
for the Rehabilitation for Victims of Violence and Torture (“El Nadeem Center”)[1],based in Cairo.
According to the
information received, in the afternoon of April 5, 2016, the Egyptian Ministry
of Health (MoH) sent a delegation to El Nadeem Center to implement the
administrative closure order and close the Center. El Nadeem directors refused
to comply and leave the premises, as the MoH representatives did not present
the original document of the closure order, as required by law. 
The MoH representatives
decided to leave the premises but called the Interior Ministry (MoI) to request
the intervention of police forces to enforce the order. 
On April 6, 2016, El Nadeem Center sent another telegram to the Director
in charge of non-governmental treatment institutions and licences at the MOH
stating that the closing team did not have an official order with them, that
the center was not inspected for any violations and that they had not been
informed of any violations to correct. The memorandum requested, again, to
suspend the closing order and to form a medical inspection committee to inspect
the clinic for any professional breaches. 
At the same time, El Nadeem Center’s
staff was informed via the media that the Azbakeyya district Governorate had
filed a complaint against them at the Azbakeya police station for not allowing
the closing team to execute the closing order. 
The Observatory fears
that the center might be closed at any time and recalls that El Nadeem Center
has challenged the order before an administrative court. However, the case has
still not been heard by the Administrative Court.
The Observatory recalls
that the decision to close El Nadeem Center comes at a time of rising
government pressure on independent human rights groups in Egypt, in the context
of a dramatic deterioration of the human rights situation in the country,
marked namely by a grave crackdown on civil society and a notable increase in
cases of torture, deaths in detention and enforced disappearances.
The Observatory urges the Egyptian authorities to
immediately and unconditionally put an end to all acts of harassment against El
Nadeem Center and against all human rights organisations in the country, and to
comply with its constitutional obligations (in particular Article 78 and
Article 93 of the 2014 Egyptian Constitution which respectively recognise the
right to freedom of association and Egypt’s compliance with international human
rights conventions ratified by Egypt) as well as its international legal
obligations (in particular Article 22 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights – ICCPR).
Background information:
On February 17, 2016
about 4 p.m. two police officers from the Azbakeyya District authority and one
city employee ordered the employees of El Nadeem Center to leave the center's
premises. The three men delivered an “administrative closure order” signed by the Director of the Health Ministry’s Free Treatment Directorate and addressed to
the head of the Azbakeyya district authority, referring to a violation of Law
453/1954[2].
The document ordered the closure of the center based on a decision signed on
February 8, 2016, “for breaching license
conditions” (providing no further
information) stamped by the Cairo district on February 15. The implementation
of the order was postponed until February 22, 2016.
At the beginning
of February, the center was visited by an employee of the Ministry of Health,
who came to inspect the center based on an order given by phone from the
Minister of Health himself. The minister employee did not have any official
papers nor an inspection warrant. The employee of the Ministry ordered a copy
of the center's license. No breaches of regulations were noted. 
On February 21, 2016,
Ms. Aida Seif al-Dawla, Director of El Nadeem Center and Dr. Suzan
Fayad, Founder of El Nadeem Center accompanied by their lawyer Ms. Maha
Yucef and the head of the Cairo's doctor's syndicate Dr. Sanaa Fuad,
held meetings with representatives of the Ministry of Health to discuss about
the “administrative closure order” issued against El Nadeem Center on February
17, 2016, for allegedly “breaching licence conditions”, without providing
further information (see background information). On February 20, 2016, El Nadeem
Center's lawyer filed an urgent motion to the Administrative Court of First
Instance to suspend the implementation of the closure order. Meanwhile, the
implementation of the order was postponed until February 22 upon El Nadeem
Center's request pending meetings at the MoH. 
During the meetings, El
Nadeem Center's representatives were informed that the MoH had ordered the
closure of El Nadeem Center for violating its license, referring to the conduct
of activities which did not fall within the mandate for which El Nadeem Center
had been licensed. Such activities include the publication of torture reports,
which according to the Ministry is not linked with rehabilitation and is not a
medical activity, and especially, the publication in January 2016 of a review
of “2015 in numbers” in the Egyptian newspaper Al-Masry Al-youm,
summarizing cases of deaths, torture and medical neglect in detention in 2015
as well as cases of extra judicial killings reported in the media. However,
during the meetings, no professional or medical breaches were identified with
regards to El Nadeem Center's activities. 
El Nadeem Center's representatives requested a moratorium and the
suspension of the closure order pending an agreement on ways to disengage their
medical activities from their human rights advocacy activities. The request was
rejected. 
On February 20, 2016, El Nadeem Center challenged the closure
order before the Administrative Court. The complaint included an urgent request
to delay implementation of the closure order until the Court has heard the
appeal, but that urgent request was not accepted. 
Actions requested:
Please
write to the authorities of Egypt asking them to:
i. Cancel
the order to close El Nadeem Center; 
ii. Put an
end to all forms of harassment against El Nadeem Center all human rights
organisations and defenders in Egypt;
iii. Comply
with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, in particular with:
-
its Article 1, which provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-
its Article 5(b): “For the purpose of
promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, everyone has
the right, individually and in association with others, at the national and
international levels (b) To form, join and participate in non-governmental
organizations, associations or groups;”
-
its Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
iv.
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
in accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Egypt.
Addresses:
·     
President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, H.E. Abdel Fattah
el-Sisi, Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 23901998
·      Prime Minister, Mr. Sherif Ismail, Magles El
Shaab Street, Kasr El Aini Street, Cairo, Egypt. Fax: + 202 2735 6449 /
27958016. Email: primemin@idsc.gov.eg
·      Minister of the
Interior, General Magdy Abdel Ghaffar, Ministry of the Interior, El-Sheikh
Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: moi1@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2579 2031 /
2794 5529
•       Minister of Justice, Mr.
Ahmed Al-Zanad, Ministry of Justice, Magles El Saeb Street, Wezaret Al Adl,
Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2795 8103
•       Public Prosecutor,
Counsellor Nabeel Sadek, Dar al-Qadha al-Ali, Ramses Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax:
+202 2577 4716
•       Mr. Mohamed Fayeq,
President of the National Council For Human Rights, Fax: + 202 25747497 /
25747670. Email: nchr@nchr.org.eg
•       H.E. Ms. Wafaa Bassim,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations in Geneva, 49
avenue Blanc, 1202 Genève, Switzerland, Email: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41 22 738 44 15
•      
Embassy of Egypt in Brussels, 19 avenue de l’Uruguay, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2
675.58.88; Email: embassy.egypt@skynet.be
Please also write to the
diplomatic missions or embassies of Egypt in your respective country.



[1]                El
Nadeem Center is registered in Egypt since 1993 and has provided hundreds of
torture victims with vital services including counseling and legal assistance.
The Center issues monthly summaries of reported instances of torture, deaths,
and medical negligence in police custody. Many of the Center’s patients say they have been
tortured by Egyptian security forces. 


[2]                The law
453/1954 regulates industrial and commercial shops, however, not clinics. The
law states that “no business shop subject to this law
can be set up or run without the relevant license; no changes or amendment in
such shops may be executed without the approval of entity which issued such
license.” 