Russian Federation:  Continuing judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of Mr. Oyub Titiev
March 13, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2019 / MarchRussian Federation: Continuing judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of Mr. Oyub Titiev

URGENT APPEAL - THE
OBSERVATORY

 
New
information
RUS 001 / 0118 / OBS 004.4
Judicial
harassment/
Arbitrary
detention
Russian Federation
March 13, 2019

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of
FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new
information and requests your intervention in the following situation in the Russian Federation.
 
New information:
 
The
Observatory has documented through its international trial observers about the
continuing judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of Mr. Oyub Titiev,
Head of the Human Rights Center (HRC) "Memorial" office in Chechnya. 
 ​​
According
to the information received, on March 11, 2019, during the closing arguments,
the Prosecutor requested the Shalinsky Court to find Mr. Oyub Titiev guilty of
drug possession in large amount (Article 228 of the Criminal Code) and to
sentence him to four years in prison (including time already served) and a fine
of 100,000 Roubles (approximately 1,350 Euros). The verdict is expected on
March 18, 2019. 
 
During
the hearing, to which the Observatory had sent representatives, Mr. Oyub Titiev
appeared in a metal cage. 
 
The
Observatory recalls that Mr. Oyub Titiev was arrested January 9, 2018 and his
trial started on July 19, 2018[1]. 
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the continuing judicial harassment and arbitrary
detention of Mr. Oyub Titiev, which seems to be only aimed at sanctioning him
for his legitimate human rights activities. The Observatory calls on the Russian
authorities to immediately and unconditionally release him and end any act of
harassment, including at the judicial level, against him and all the human
rights defenders in the country. 
 
Background information: 
 
In the morning of January 9, 2018, Mr. Oyub
Titiev left his home in the village of Kurchaloi, in the Chechen Republic, to
head to a meeting with a friend scheduled at 9am and subsequently to the office
of HRC "Memorial" in Grozny. Mr. Titiev being more than one hour
late for the meeting with a friend whose identity is not being revealed on
purpose, the latter spotted Mr. Titiev on a road between the villages
Kurchaloi and Mairtup, next to the bridge on the river Khumyk. Next to
Mr. Titiev were five-six traffic police officers inspecting his car. Mr. Titiev
gave his friend a sign not to approach him, and after the both cars left - that
of Titiev and the second belonging to the traffic police - he headed to the
Kurchaloi District Department of Internal Affairs supposing Mr. Titiev
would be taken there. Although he was not allowed to enter the District
Department of Internal Affairs, Mr. Titiev’s car present outside and
unofficial sources allowed him to assume Mr. Titiev’s detention.
 
Despite repeated calls, the District Department
officially kept denying Mr. Titiev’s presence. If Mr. Titiev’s
detention was not officially confirmed by the authorities until seven hours
after his detention when Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Interior of the
Chechen Republic Apti Alaudinov confirmed to the Russian Ombudsman Tatiana
Moskalkova that Mr. Titiev was being kept in Kurchaloi police station.
Several hours later, Mr. Titiev’s lawyer confirmed that his client was
charged under Article 228 of the Criminal Code possessing drugs in large
amounts.
 
On January 17, 2018, at 3.35 am, the CCTV
camera of the HRC “Memorial” office recorded two young men, wearing masks and
gloves, one of whom was carrying a canister. The arsonists put a ladder to the
roof of the building and climbed to the second floor of the office. The attackers
also attempted to break one of the CCTV video cameras installed on the building
on their way to the window of HRC “Memorial”’s office. The camera also recorded
the rapid departure of the two arsonists. Fortunately, the two attackers could
only access three of the six rooms. The fire brigade arrived quickly at the
scene and extinguished the fire but not before three of the office’s six rooms
were burnt, destroying electronic equipment and documents. The remains of a
melted plastic bottle with the smell of kerosene were found in the office of
HRC “Memorial” Ingushetia office’s Head Mr. Timur Akiev.
 
Furthermore, on January 15 and 16, 2018, Mr. Oleg Orlov, Chairman of
HRC “Memorial” Council, lawyer Petr Zaikin and journalists who were in Chechnya
to investigate the case of Mr. Titiev were subjected to constant
surveillance of local law-enforcement bodies. For two days, the group was
detained five times allegedly for verification of their involvement with
illegal armed groups.
 
Mr. Titiev’s family members were
threatened by law enforcement authorities and consequently left Chechnya in
late January 2018. Likewise, one of Mr. Titiev’s lawyers, Mr. Aslan Telkhigov, was
allegedly forced to resign from Mr. Titiev’s defence team and to leave
Chechnya in late January 2018.
 
On January 22, 2018, HRC Memorial’s car, used
by one of Mr. Titiev’s lawyers, Mr.
Petr Zaikin, was set on fire in neighbouring Dagestan. In
addition, on February 5, 2018, Chechen authorities ordered residents of several
private houses, including Mr. Titiev’s, to leave their house within a
week. Houses will be demolished to build a shopping center.
 
On March 6, 2018, the Staropromyslovsky
District Court in Grozny rejected an appeal filed against the pre-trial
detention order and extended Mr. Oyub Titiev’s pre-trial detention for
another two months, until May 9, 2018, despite the fact that two guarantors
pledged for a “personal vouch”[2].
 
On March 19, 2018, Chechnya’s Supreme Court
confirmed Mr. Oyub Titiev’s pre-trial detention until May 9, 2018, despite
arguments from his lawyers that the extension of his pre-trial detention is
baseless. During the hearing, Mr. Oyub Titiev appeared in cage.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities of Russia asking them to:
 
i.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical integrity and psychological
well-being of Mr. Oyub Titiev and all human rights defenders in the country;
 
ii.
Immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Oyub Titiev, and put an end to all
acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against him as well as
against all human rights defenders in the country; 
 
iii.
Ensure in all circumstances that human rights defenders are able to carry out
their legitimate activities without any hindrance and fear of reprisals;
 
iv.
Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in
particular its Articles 1, 6(a), 9, 11 and 12.2;
 
v.
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
in accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by the Russian Federation.
 
Addresses:
 
·       Mr. Vladimir Putin, President of the Russian Federation, Fax: + 7 495
606 3602; + 7 495 625 3581
·       Mr. Dimitri Medvedev, Prime Minister of the Russian Federation, Twitter:
@MedvedevRussia
·       Mr. Sergueï Lavrov, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation, Fax: + 7 495 644 2203
·       Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the United Nations in
Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 734 40 44, E-mail: mission.russian@vtxnet.ch
·       Embassy of the Russian Federation in Brussels, Belgium. Fax: +32 2 374
26 13. E-mail: mission.russian@vtxnet.ch
·       Permanent Representation of the Russian Federation to the Council of
Europe, France. Fax: (+33) (0) 3 88 24 19 74. Email: russia.coe@orange.fr
 
Please also write
to the diplomatic representations of the Russian Federation in your respective countries.
 
***
 
Paris-Geneva,
March 13, 2019
 
Kindly inform us
of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to
prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. FIDH
and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders
Mechanism implemented by international civil society.  
 
To contact the
Observatory, call the emergency line:
·      
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·       Tel and fax FIDH +33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 /
+33 1 43 55 18 80
·       Tel and fax OMCT +41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / +41
22 809 49 29
 



[1]           See Observatory Press Release “Russia: Call for immediate
release of Oyub Titiev, as trial starts today”, published on July 9, 2018. 


[2]           Personal vouch is a provision in Russian legislation as an
alternative to pre-trial detention. 2018 Presidential candidate Grigorii
Yavlinskii, was personally at the hearing to present his claim for personal
vouch. 