Belarus:  Arrest and sentencing of human rights defender Aleh Volchek
June  1, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Belarus / 2012 / JuneBelarus: Arrest and sentencing of human rights defender Aleh Volchek

PRESS
RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

 
BELARUS: Arrest and harassment of
prominent human rights defender
 
Paris-Geneva,
June 1, 2012. The Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the  International Federation of Human (FIDH) and
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), deplores the recent arrest and
sentencing of human rights defender Aleh Volchek.
 
On
May 24, 2012, Mr. Aleh Volchek, Head of “Legal Aid to the Population”,
an organisation that provided legal assistance until it was liquidated in 2003,
was arrested by plain-clothed police officers who accused him of “swearing in
public”. He was later brought to the Department of the Ministry of Internal
Affairs of Tsentralniy district in Minsk,
and sentenced on the same day to nine days' administrative imprisonment by the
Minsk Tsentralniy District Court, under Article 17.1 of the Code of
Administrative Offences (“swearing against the police”). 
 
Mr.
Aleh Volchek is presently held in the Centre for the Isolation of Delinquents
(CID) at the City Department of Internal Affairs in Minsk.
His arrest and detention could be related to an article published on the
Charter 97 website on May 21, in which he denounced the beatings carried out by
the police against young demonstrators, whom they labelled as ”criminals”. In
the article, Mr. Volcheck also called on Belarusian politicians to take a stand
regarding the violent repression of the rights to freedom of expression and the
beating of demonstrators by the police, and called on them to take judicial
action. The arrest, sentencing and arbitrary detention of Mr Volchek come in
the wake of previous harassment and attempts to limit his human rights
activities, which have intensified since early 2012. Mr.
Volcheck had already been sentenced in January 2012 to four days’
administrative detention for allegedly using foul language in the street (see
Observatory Urgent Appeal BLR 001 / 0112 / OBS 014.1).
 
The
Observatory urges the Belarusian authorities to release Mr. Volchek immediately
and unconditionally as his detention is arbitrary and is related solely to the
exercise of his legitimate right to freedom of expression. The authorities
should put an end to any kind of harassment against Mr. Volchek and to conform
to the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
and to international human rights standards and instruments ratified by the Republic
 of Belarus.

 
For
further information, please contact:
·        
FIDH: Karine Appy / Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18
·       
OMCT:
Isabelle Scherer: + 41 22 809 49 39 