Intervention to the 58th session of the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights
April 14, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2016 / AprilIntervention to the 58th session of the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights

Please find the Oral Intervention here: Oral Intervention 58 ACHPR_ENGAFRICAN COMMISSION ON HUMAN AND PEOPLES'
RIGHTS 
 
58th ordinary session
 
Banjul, The Gambia
 
April 6 -
20, 2016
 
Contribution of the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) 
and the International Federation for Human
Rights (FIDH) 
 
In the framework of their joint programme,

The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders 
 
 
Madame Chairperson, Distinguished
Commissioners and State Delegates,
 
The World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, within the framework of the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, thank the African Commission
on Human and Peoples’ Rights (ACHPR) for this opportunity to raise some of the
key issues with respect to the situation of human rights defenders in Africa.
 
While States have the duty to protect human
rights defenders and to ensure that they operate in a safe and enabling
environment, attacks, threats, judicial harassment, restrictive laws, smear
campaigns against the latter continue to perpetuate an environment of hostility
for their activities. Impunity
for violations such as extra-judicial killings and enforced disappearances is
another worrying trend that maintains civil society in Africa in a climate of
fear. 
 
Throughout
the African continent, the space for civil society and human rights defenders
is shrinking, due to three major challenges tied together. First of all, the
lack of alternation of power in some African countries has driven the
authorities to exercise greater control on civil society. In addition, as the
African continent is undergoing 30 elections, including 18 presidential
elections in 21 African countries this year, human rights violations and
escalation of violence are likely to increase, putting civil society
organisations at the forefront of repression. In other countries, the question
of natural resources remains another major challenge, fuelling the repression
against land and environmental rights defenders.
 
In
such contexts, State representatives and non-State actors commonly resort to
political, economic, cultural, religious and security pretexts to undermine
human rights principles, their universality, their indivisibility and their
monitoring bodies, resulting in increased vulnerability for human rights
defenders.
 
Human
rights defenders are routinely portrayed as “obstacles to development”, enemies
and traitors, criminals who must be combated. Such discourse is contrary to the
spirit and letter of the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights as well
as the United Nations (UN) Declaration on Human Rights Defenders. It promotes
the repression of human rights defenders. It justifies their criminalisation. 


1. Ongoing use of the
judicial arsenal to silence dissenting voices in the framework of electoral
contexts
 
In
many African countries known for repressing dissenting voices, we are concerned
that human rights defenders are criminalised in relation to their peaceful
activities, including in the framework of electoral contexts. 
 
Our
organisations are particularly worried by the serious and ongoing deterioration
of the human rights situation in Burundi since April 2015, following President Pierre
Nkurunziza’s third term bid. Protests were violently crushed while the rights
to freedoms of association, of assembly and of expression were heavily
undermined before, during and after the elections in July 2015. The Burundian
authorities have since silenced independent media, and hundreds of human rights
defenders have fled the
country by fear of reprisals. Many of those who remain in Burundi continue to
be subject to intimidation, harassment and physical attacks. 
 
The Observatory is particularly concerned
by the enforced disappearance of Ms. Marie-Claudette
Kwizera, Treasurer of the Iteka League, since December 10, 2015, when she
was abducted near the central polyclinic of Bujumbura and forced into a vehicle
of Burundian National Intelligence Service (NIS). Since that date, Burundian
authorities have refused to provide any information about her fate or
whereabouts.
 
While
taking note of the fact-finding mission carried out by the African Commission
to Burundi from December 7 to 13, 2015, the Observatory respectfully calls on
the Commission to publicly release the detailed conclusions of its
investigation, to continue to closely monitor attacks on human rights defenders
and their families, and to urge the Government of Burundi to immediately end
such violations and to bring those responsible before independent and impartial
courts.
 
In
Angola,
Mr. José Marcos Mavungo remain arbitrary
detained since March 2015, following his sentencing, in September of the same
year, to six years in prison for organising a peaceful demonstration against
human rights violations and bad governance in the province of Cabinda. Mr. José
Marcos Mavungo is a former member of the human rights organisation Mpalabanda -
banned by the authorities in 2006.
 
On March 28, 2016, the Luanda Provincial Tribunal sentenced
the 16 pro-democracy activists who were arrested in June 2015 for organising
peaceful protests against the 35-year regime of Angolan President Eduardo Dos
Santos to jail terms ranging from two years and three months to eight years and
six months for the alleged crimes of “preparatory acts of rebellion” and
“association of criminals”. The 16 activists, namely Messrs. Henrique Luaty Beirão, Nuno Alvaro Dala, Nelson Dibango Mendes Dos Santos, Alfonso Joao Matias (“M'banza Hamza”),
Sedrick de Carvalho, Fernando
António Tómas, Hitler Chiconda (“Samussuku”), Italiano Arante Kivuvu, Benedito
Jeremias (“Dito Dali”), Albano Evaristo Bingobingo, José Gomes Hata, Inocêncio De Brito, Manuel Nito Alves and Ms. Rosa
Kusso Conde, Ms. Laurinda Manuel Gouveia, journalist Mr. Domingos
da Cruz, as well as Mr.
Osvaldo Correia Caholo, a reserve military officer acquainted to one of the 16,
were sent to different prison
facilities. Both the prosecution and defence lawyers stated that they would
appeal the verdict and sentences before the Supreme Court. 
 
In Chad, as of April 8, 2016, five human rights activists were detained at Am Sinéné prison in N’Djamena: four of them are facing
trial for planning to organise peaceful demonstrations that had been scheduled
for March 22 and 29, 2016 to protest against President Idriss Deby’s bid for
re-election for a fifth mandate. Mr. Mahamat
Nour Ibedou, President of the Chadian Convention for Human Rights (Convention tchadienne pour les
droits de l'Homme)
and member of the civil society organisations coalition “It’s Enough” (“Ça suffit”), was arrested on March 21,
2016. On March 22, 2016, Mr. Kaina Nadjo,
Coordinator of the youth movement “Iyina” (“We are tired” in local Arabic), and
Mr. Younouss Mahadjir,
Vice-President of the Union of Chadian Trade Unions (Union des syndicats du Tchad - UST), were in turn arrested. Ms. Céline Narmadji, Spokesperson of the
civil society movement “Enough is Enough” (“Trop
c’est trop”), was arrested on March 23. The four were charged with “incitement to an unarmed gathering”,
“disturbing public order” and “disobeying a lawful order”. On April 7, the Prosecutor of the Republic
requested six months imprisonment against the latter. A verdict is expected for
April 14, 2016. Besides, on April 4, 2016, Dr. Allazam Albissaty Saleh,
spokesperson a.i. of the “It's Enough” coalition, was heard and placed in
detention in the premises of the Criminal Police Department, ahead of a
peaceful march planned on April 5 within the framework of the coalition. On
April 7 in the afternoon, he was eventually transferred to the Am Sinéné
prison. Dr. Saleh is currently facing accusations of “incitement to an unarmed
gathering”, “disturbing public order” and “disobeying a lawful order”. Before
his arrest, he was acting as the substitute of Mr. Nour Ibedou, detained since
March 21. On another related note, on April 4, Mr. Bertrand Solo, a
representative of “Iyina”, was summonsed by phone by the Head of Criminal Cases
but refused to show up alleging that the summons had not been made in due form.
In addition, proceedings were reportedly launched in view of arresting lawyer Midaye Guerimbaye, President of the Chadian League for Human Rights (Ligue tchadienne des droits de l’Homme -
LTDH), affiliated to “It's Enough”.
 
In
the Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC), human rights defender Christopher Ngoyi Mutamba, President of the NGO Congo
Culture and Development Synergy (Synergie Congo culture et développement) and Coordinator of the Platform Civil
Society of Congo, has remained arbitrarily detained since January 2015. His
arrest followed his participation in protests held in Kinshasa
against proposed amendments to the Electoral Code Law. He is also a member of
the Let’s Save Congo (Sauvons le Congo)
Network, a coalition of opposition parties and civil society organisations
opposed to amendment of the Constitution or any other laws in a bid to extend
the term of President Kabila beyond December 2016. Mr. Christopher Ngoyi
Mutamba was charged with “incitement
to racial hatred”,
“arson” and “pillage”. On February 24, 2016, Ms. Rebecca
Kavugho, Mr. Serge Sivyavugha,
Mr. Justin Kambale Mutsongo, Mr. Melka Kamundu, Mr. John
Anipenda and Mr. Ghislain
Muhiwa six members of the
Struggle for Change (Lutte pour le Changement - LUCHA) youth movement, were sentenced to two years in prison
on charges of “attempting to incite disobedience”. The six were arrested on
February 16 in Goma, before a general strike held in protest against delays in
organising the 2016 general elections. They remain detained at Muzenze
prison in Goma. Similarly,
two members of the Filimbi citizens’ initiative, which promotes youth
participation in electoral and democratic process, Messrs. Yves Makwambala and
Fred Bauma, also a member of the LUCHA movement, have remained detained
since March 2015. 
 
2. Land and environmental rights
defenders particularly at risk
 
Throughout
the African continent, our organisations remain concerned by the scale of attacks
against economic, social and cultural rights defenders, in particular land and
environmental rights defenders, in countries such as in Cameroon, Sierra
Leone and South Africa, where Mr. Sikhosiphi Bazooka Rhadebe, Chairperson of the Amadiba
Crisis Committee, was murdered on March 22, 2016 for leading
his community
in resisting attempts from Australian-owned mining company MRC and its
local subsidiary TEM to access its titanium-rich Xolobeni coastal dunes, which
would result in disruption of the community's way of life.
 
In Cameroon, the Observatory
remains alarmed by the judicial harassment against prominent environmental
activist Mr. Nasako Besingi, Director of the NGO
Struggle to Economize Future Environment (SEFE), a local environmental
organisation based in Mundemba, Ndian division. On January 21, 2016, Mr.
Besingi was sentenced to pay 25,000 FCFA in fines and more than 400,000 FCFA in
court charges or face one year in prison. Mr. Besingi was convicted for “unlawful assembly”, after a
number of court adjournments. The charges were related to the distribution of T-shirts
against the company Herakles Farms and the project of his local subsidiary to
build a large-scale palm oil plantation, which would lead to massive
deforestation and threaten the livelihoods of residents in an area home to
vital biodiversity. On November 3, 2015, Mr. Besingi had already been sentenced
by the Mundemba Court in the southwest region of Cameroon to a fine of one
million FCFA (approx. 1,520 Euros) for “false publication” and “defamation”. In
addition, Mr. Besingi was condemned to pay damages of 10 million FCFA (approx.
15,200 Euros) to the two civil parties (workers of Herakles) and around 200,000
FCFA (approx. 304 Euros) of legal costs.
 
The
Observatory is also concerned by the continued judicial harassment against several members of the Malen Land
Owners and Users Association (MALOA) in Sierra Leone. For the past three
years, MALOA has been monitoring and denouncing the negative human rights
impact of the activities of Socfin Agricultural Company Sierra Leone Ltd (SAC)
in Malen's district, in particular acts of land grabbing.
On February 4, 2016, Messrs. Shiaka Sama, MALOA Spokesperson, Sima
Mattia, James Blango, Lahai Sellu, Musa Sellu and Foday Musa,
MALOA members, were found guilty of “destruction of growing plants belonging to
SAC”, “destruction of growing plants”, “conspiracy” and “incitement” for allegedly brushing palm oil plants belonging to SAC.
As MALOA’s Spokesperson, Mr. Shiaka Sama was sentenced to pay a fine of
60,000,000 Leones (approx. 13,000 Euros) or face six months of imprisonment.
The five other activists were sentenced to pay a fine of 30,000,000 Leones
(approx. 6,500 Euros) each or face five months of imprisonment. While Messrs.
Shiaka Sama, Sima Mattia and James Blango were subsequently released, Messrs.
Lahai Sellu, Musa Sellu and Foday Musa are currently in detention pending
payment of the fine.
 
3. Restrictions to freedom of association
 
In some African countries authorities
continue to exercise greater control on civil society.
 
In
recent years, authorities in Ethiopia have passed a host of laws
attacking the media and civil society that have made independent human rights
work in the country almost impossible. 
 
Moreover,
in Rwanda, independent civil society organisations have become
extremely weak as a result of years of State intimidation and infiltration. The
only remaining effective Rwandan human rights group, the Rwandan League for the
Promotion and Defence of Human Rights (Ligue rwandaise pour la promotion et la défense des droits de
l’Homme - LIPRODHOR), was taken over by members sympathetic
to the government in 2013.
 
Last
but not least, the Observatory is extremely concerned by the unprecedented
crackdown on human rights organisations and defenders recently observed in Egypt,
where the authorities have summoned human rights workers for questioning,
banned them from travel and attempted to freeze their personal funds and family
assets. Scores of human
rights organisations and defenders have reportedly been enlisted in the case
known as the “foreign funding case No. 173”, a
five-year-old investigation into the funding and registration of independent
human rights groups. Organisations targeted include Nazra for Feminist Studies,
the Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies (CIHRS) the United Group, a law
firm that has published reports on torture, the Arab Center for the
Independence of the Judiciary and the Legal Profession (ACIJLP), the Land
Center for Human Rights (LCHR), the Egyptian Democratic Academy (EDA), the
Hisham Mubarak Law Center (HMLC), the Arabic Network for Human Rights
Information (ANHRI), the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights (EIPR), El
Nadim Center for the Rehabilitation of Victims of Violence and Torture, the
Egyptian Center for Economic and Social Rights (ECESR), the Arab Penal Reform
Organization, the Egyptian Center for the Right to Education, El-Haq, the
Egyptian Association for Community Participation Enhancement (ACPE), the
Appropriate Communications Technologies (ACT), among others.
In the
context of the “foreign funding case”, on March 29, 2016, Ms. Mozn
Hassan, Executive Director of Nazra for Feminist Studies, was summoned for
questioning as a defendant. The interrogation was then adjourned until further notice. On the same
day, three staff members of the Andalus Center for Tolerance and Nonviolence
Studies were also summoned for interrogation in the same case. On
March 19, 2016, a Cairo criminal court heard a request from the investigating
judges to freeze the assets of Mr. Hossam
Bahgat, a journalist and founder of the Egyptian Initiative for Personal
Rights who currently writes for the Egyptian news website Mada Masr, and Mr. Gamal Eid,
a lawyer and the Director of the Arab Network for Human Rights Information. A
Cairo criminal court had already issued an order in February to bar Messrs.
Bahgat and Eid from travelling outside Egypt. Besides, on March 13 and 14,
2016, two staff members of CIHRS and three staff members of Nazra for Feminist
Studies were notified by telephone of a summons to appear on March 16 before
the Investigating Judge. On February 17, 2016, officials of the Ministry of
Health (MoH) issued an administrative order to close the El Nadeem Center for
the Rehabilitation of Victims of Violence and Torture, on the basis that it was
performing unlicensed work. On April 5, 2016, the MoH sent a delegation to El
Nadeem Center to implement the order and close the Center. El Nadeem directors
refused to comply and leave the premises, as the MoH representatives did not
present the original document of the closure order, as required by law. At the
same time, El Nadeem Center’s staff was informed via the media that the
Azbakeyya district Governorate had filed a complaint against them at the
Azbakeya police station for not allowing the closing team to execute the
closing order. The Center has been licensed as a medical clinic since 1993 and
has provided hundreds of torture victims with vital services, including
counselling and legal assistance.
 
4. Recommendations: 
 
1) In view of the above-mentioned
elements, the Observatory reminds States Parties of their obligation to comply
with all the provisions of the African Charter, in particular those relating to
the protection of human rights defenders. In that regard, States should
immediately and unconditionally:
 
- Implement all the provisions of
the 1998 United Nations (UN) Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, especially
by guaranteeing in all circumstances their physical and psychological integrity
and their capacity to operate in a safe and enabling environment;
 
- Release all defenders who are
arbitrarily detained for their activities of promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, in particular freedoms of expression, peaceful
assembly and association;
 
- Develop differentiated measures
for the protection of the most vulnerable groups of human rights defenders such
as land and environmental rights defenders, defenders working in rural areas,
woman human rights defenders or defenders working on LGBTI issues;
 
- Put an end to all acts of
harassment - including at the judicial level - against human rights defenders;
 
- Order immediate, thorough,
transparent investigations into allegations of violations of the rights of
human rights defenders, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them
before an independent tribunal, and apply them the sanctions provided by the
law;
 
- Refrain from adopting any
provisions that do not comply with international and African standards with
respect to the exercise of the right to freedom of expression, peaceful
assembly and association, and abrogate or revise any such provisions that may
be in force;
 
- Send a standing invitation to the
UN and ACHPR’s Special Rapporteurs on Human Rights Defenders and facilitate
their country visits.
2)
The Observatory also calls upon the ACHPR to:
 
-
Highlight the legitimate work carried out by human rights defenders, and the
need for their protection from harassment and attacks; 
 
- Systematically raise the question of the situation
of human rights defenders as well as denounce and condemn all human rights
violations they face during the examination of the periodic reports of States
parties to the ACHPR, and on the occasion of all visits conducted in a State
party;
 
-
Denounce the impunity that prevails with regard to these violations, and urge
States to hold those responsible to account;
 
- Increase its capacities to respond to urgent
situations faced by human rights defenders;
 
- Ensure the effective implementation of its
resolutions, concluding observations and decisions on communications in order
that everyone, including human rights defenders, be able to effectively enjoy
all the rights and freedoms recognised by the ACHPR, the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders;
 
- Continue to strengthen the collaboration with the
UN Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights Defenders, as well as
with the other regional mechanisms dedicated to the protection of human rights
defenders.
 
Thank you for your attention. 