Bahrain:  Arbitrary arrest of Nabeel Rajab
April  8, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Bahrain / 2015 / AprilBahrain: Arbitrary arrest of Nabeel RajabOMCT ECDHR FIDH statement2 pages / 178 KBOn 2 April
2015, at approximately 4:00 PM local time (GMT+3), Bahraini security forces and
police arrested Nabeel Rajab, prominent human rights defender and president of
the Bahrain Center for Human Rights (BCHR). Reports indicate that over 20 police
vehicles surrounded his home in Bani Jamra. In a statement shortly following
his arrest, the Bahraini Ministry of Interior confirmed the charges against
Nabeel, stating that he “posted information that could incite others and
disrupt civil peace,” and that he “illegally defamed a statutory body.”
Nabeel Rajab
has been accused of insulting a statutory body (by denouncing acts of torture
in Jaw prison) and spreading rumours during wartime (by criticising Bahrain’s
involvement in the current conflict in Yemen). Nabeel remains under solitary
confinement in prison, as is not expected to be released before 11 April 2015,
at the earliest. For these two charges, Nabeel Rajab faces up to 10 years in
prison. 
In an opinion piece that Nabeel published on Huffington Post last
week, Rajab stated, “Prisoners have rights and prisons should be centres of
rehabilitation. In Bahrain, inmates are punished for being inmates, and
punished collectively. Torture is a crime against humanity, yet it is a
constant feature in Jaw.”
This is not
the first time that the government has punished Rajab for exercising his
internationally-guaranteed right to free expression. In May 2014, Rajab completed a two-year
prison sentence after taking part in peaceful assemblies and protests
criminalized by the government. Mr Rajab is currently
facing another trial for a previous tweet he wrote in September 2014. His
appeal for this 6 months sentence was scheduled for 15 April. It however took
place on 5 April and was then delayed until 4 May, the prosecutor arguing the
existence of new evidence under this case. Further, Nabeel’s home was raided
that same day and all the electronics in his home (whether his own or not) were
seized for evidence. 
Nabeel has previously reached out to the EU to seek
support for his case and long standing battle for Human Rights in Bahrain. In
past occasions, the European External Action Service
and the European
Parliament have issued formal statement demanding his
immediate release, as well as of others fellow human rights defenders and
Bahraini citizens labelled criminals by the Government for peacefully speaking
their mind about the human rights violations and democratic deficit in Bahrain.
Despite these gross human rights abuses and the blatant injustice they suffer,
the EU institutions have not used their full leverage on the matter. 
Nabeel’s case is just an example of the many injustices committed in
Bahrain and in the Gulf Region daily, because they dare to speak out and to
defend basic human rights and ideals. Injustice does not stop there; the
treatment detainees receive in prisons amounts to grave torture and inhuman or
degrading treatment, putting their physical and mental health at grave risks,
as well as the health and security of their relatives. 
The European Centre for Democracy and Human Rights (representing
Americans for Democracy and Human Rights in Bahrain, the Bahrain Center for
Human Rights and the Bahrain Institute for Rights and Democracy), FIDH and the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) urgently seek to raise awareness of
the human rights situation in Bahrain and the Gulf Region and call upon the
European Union to stand firm against these abuses of freedom suffered by many.
We also urge you to ask for the charges brought against Nabeel, and other
unjustly imprisoned Bahrainis, to be dropped immediately and for their
unconditional release. 