DCI and OMCT launch the second edition of the Justice for Children Award
November 17, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Statements / 2016 / NovemberDCI and OMCT launch the second edition of the Justice for Children Award




Geneva – 16 November 2016. Defence for Children
International (DCI) and the World Organization Against Torture (OMCT)[1]
are launching today the second edition of the Justice for Children Award, which
encourages research within European universities on the challenges within
justice systems worldwide that slow the realization of children’s rights.  
DCI and OMCT see the Justice for Children Award as an opportunity
to raise further awareness on the issue within the academic fora, and enables
young scholars to contribute to the improvement of the situation of girls
involved with the justice system. 
This year’s edition will be dedicated to the
situation of girls involved with the justice system and more particularly to the
various forms of violence that they are exposed to. 
“Justice systems often fail to provide girls, either as victims
seeking justice or as alleged and/or convicted offenders, with equal and
adequate access to justice, protection, reparation and redress, rather
furthering violence against them”, said Johan Vigne, Project Officer at DCI. 
Furthermore, in
detention, girls are often held in
unsuitable conditions, and are more likely to be exposed to certain forms of
violence, which may include
torture and ill-treatment. “Their specific vulnerabilities frequently mean that
they are victimized twice, both because of their age and their gender,” added Carolina Bárbara,
Child Rights Coordinator at OMCT.
  
About the Justice for Children Award 

Applications
to the Justice for Children Award are open to Master’s students enrolled in European
Universities (EU, Switzerland and Norway). The deadline for submissions is 30
April 2017. 
The
winner of the competition will be awarded a monetary prize, will have his/her
article published and will be invited to Geneva to attend a session of one of
the United Nations Human Rights mechanisms and the award ceremony. 
All
the details, including the concept note, rules and regulation, application form
as well as information on last year’s edition is available at: http://www.defenceforchildren.org/justice-for-children-award/ 
For
more information: award@defenceforchildren.org / +41 (0)22 734 05 58




[1] DCI and OMCT are members of the core group of the NGO Panel for
the upcoming UN Global Study on Children Deprived of Liberty: https://childrendeprivedofliberty.info/ 