Kyrgyzstan:  at a Crossroads: the authorities must widen the scene for human rights defenders
June 14, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2016 / JuneKyrgyzstan: at a Crossroads: the authorities must widen the scene for human rights defenders

Findings of an
international mission
 
Paris-Geneva,
June 14, 2016 - As a trial is due to resume tomorrow against the President
of Kyrgyzstan for his slanderous statements against two leading Kyrgyz human
rights activists, the Observatory (joint FIDH-OMCT partnership) publishes today
the main concerns of an international mission conducted last week in
partnership and solidarity with FIDH member organisations, Bir Duino Kyrgyzstan
and Kylym Shamy. The international mission aimed to present an Observatory
report titled “Kyrgyzstan at a Crossroads: Shrink or Widen the Scene for Human Rights
Defenders” to the authorities and the media.
 
The Observatory delegation met
with the First Vice Minister of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Kyrgyzstan,
the Deputy Prosecutor General, the Deputy Ombudsman, a member of Parliament, as
well as the OSCE Office Representative, the OHCHR Representative, the Head of
the European Union (EU) Delegation, and representatives from the United States,
Switzerland, United Kingdom, Germany, France, and Sweden embassies. Besides, a
seminar on the situation of human rights defenders in Kyrgyzstan and other
countries in the post-Soviet area was organised, with the participation of more
than 50 defenders from different regions of Kyrgyzstan, as well as regional
experts and human rights defenders from Kazakhstan and Russia. The mission was
composed of Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH Honorary President (Tunisia), Ales
Bialiatski, FIDH Vice President and Human Rights Centre “Viasna” President
(Belarus), and Alexandra Poméon, Observatory Director at FIDH (France).
 
The delegation concluded that
while the Foreign Agent Bill has been rejected thanks to the important
mobilisation of the Kyrgyz civil society and of the international community,
the environment for human rights defenders remains deleterious. The mission
could witness a general context of demonisation of NGOs, regularly accused of
"receiving foreign funding", "LGBTI propaganda",
"foreign interference", or "attempt to destabilise the
country". During a public speech on May 14, 2016, the President of
Kyrgyzstan, Mr. Almazbek Atambayev, resorted to the "foreign agent"
terminology to smear Ms. Tolekan Ismailova, President of Bir Duino
Kyrgyzstan, and Ms. Aziza Abdirasulova, President of Kylym Shamy. The
two NGO Heads subsequently filed a complaint against the Kyrgyz President for
"insulting their honour and dignity". Last week, the Observatory delegation
observed the opening of the trial before the Pervomaysk region court of Bishkek
on June 8. The next hearing is scheduled for June 15, 2016. 
 
The Observatory firmly deplores
the slanderous statements made last week in a number of pro-government Kyrgyz
media against its delegates, accusing them, inter alia, of “meddling in
the internal affairs of Kyrgyzstan” and “destabilising the country” in relation
with the mission's human rights and solidarity activities. The delegation also
regrets that it was again denied the right to visit human rights defender Azimjan
Askarov in jail, as it was already the case during a previous Observatory
mission in September 2015 in spite of duly-filed requests with the competent
authorities.
 At the legislative level, the delegation fears that
restrictive legislative initiatives might be adopted in Parliament. In
particular the Bill on the “promotion of non traditional sexual
relationships", which was already voted in second reading, is still on
Parliament's agenda for a final vote. The delegation was also alerted on the pressure and risks
of prosecution faced by journalists and the media, due to the control of media
outlets by State officials (TV, radio, Web, newspapers), and to the lack of
independence and plurality of journalists.
 
The delegation made a number of
recommendations to the Kyrgyz authorities which can be found in the report
published last week and available here. 
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders.

For more information, please
contact:
·       FIDH: Audrey Couprie: +
33143552518
·      
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau / Miguel Martín
Zumalacárregui: +41 22 809 49 39 