Turkey:  Arbitrary detention and upcoming trial of four academics and researcher
April 20, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2016 / AprilTurkey: Arbitrary detention and upcoming trial of four academics and researcher
New information
TUR 001 / 0116 / OBS 010.1
Arbitrary detention /
Judicial harassment
Turkey
April 20, 2016
 
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for
Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Turkey. 
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by
reliable sources about the arbitrary detention and upcoming trial of four academics and
researchers, Ms. Esra Mungan Gürsoy, Ms. Meral Camcı, Mr. Kıvanç Ersoy and Mr. Muzaffer
Kaya.
 
According to the information received, on
April 22, 2016, Ms. Esra Mungan Gürsoy, Ms. Meral Camcı, Mr. Kıvanç Ersoy and
Mr. Muzaffer Kaya will appear before the Istanbul 13th Heavy Penal
Court to face charges of “terrorist propaganda” (Article 7/2 of Anti-Terrorism Law) after denouncing human rights
violations in a press statement and a petition. Currently held
in pre-trial detention, the four face prison sentences ranging from one and a
half to seven and a half years.
 
Ms. Esra Mungan Gürsoy, Mr. Kıvanç Ersoy
and Mr. Muzaffer Kaya were arrested on March 15, 2016 and have since been
detained in high security closed prisons in İstanbul, Bakırköy Prison for Women
and Silivri Prison for Men, respectively. Ms. Meral Camcı was arrested upon her
return to Turkey on March 31, 2016 and has been detained in Bakırköy Prison for
Women since then. 
 
The indictment against them refers to a
press statement which they read out on March 10, 2016 on behalf of the
Academics for Peace, as well as to a related petition, entitled “We will not be
a Party to This Crime”, which was supported by more than 1,000 academics
throughout Turkey and abroad (see background information).
 
The Observatory expresses its deepest
concern over the ongoing judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of human
rights defenders in Turkey and calls upon the Turkish authorities to
immediately and unconditionally release Ms. Esra Mungan Gürsoy, Ms. Meral
Camcı, Mr. Kıvanç Ersoy and Mr. Muzaffer Kaya and drop all charges pending
against academics for denouncing human rights violations since they are
arbitrary as they only aim at sanctioning their human rights activities.
Pending their release, it further urges the Turkish authorities to ensure that
any judicial proceeding against Ms. Esra Mungan Gürsoy, Ms. Meral Camcı, Mr.
Kıvanç Ersoy and Mr. Muzaffer Kaya are carried out in full compliance with
their right to a fair trial, as protected under international law. 
 
Background information:
 
On January 15, 2016 an anti-terrorism
police operation targeting more than 1.000 academics in Turkey who had signed a
statement denouncing State violence on Kurdish provinces was launched, leading
to the arrest of 20 of them[1],
among
whom Mr. M.D. Ümit Biçer, Board Member of the Human Rights Foundation of Turkey (HRFT) and professor at the Kocaeli University, under laws prohibiting “making
propaganda for a terrorist organisation” and the ”denigration of the Turkish
Nation”. Later on the same date, all academics were released. At the time of
publication of this Urgent Appeal, the investigation was ongoing.
 
On January 11, 2016, more than 1,400
academics in Turkey and abroad had published a statement led by Academics for
Peace entitled “We will not be a Party to This Crime”. The statement expressed
concern that the ongoing curfews, which have been declared in several cities
across South East Turkey, are exposing their inhabitants to severe human rights
violations and asked that they are immediately lifted and that solutions for a
permanent peace process be established. Furthermore, it called the State of
Turkey to put an end to violence and prepare the conditions for peace
negotiations. However, soon after its publication, President Recep Tayyip
Erdoğan heavily criticised the academics and compared them to terrorists. In a
public speech made on January 15, 2016, he referred to the academics as “the
darkest of dark” and accused them of having committed “the same crime as those
who carry out massacres”. The President also called the academics the “fifth
column” for terrorists. Several academics are also said to have received threats
via social media and by telephone, including from nationalist mafia boss Sedat
Peker, who has publicly threatened the group saying: “we will bathe in your
blood”.
 
The arrests of the academics have taken
place against the backdrop of the deteriorating human rights situation in
Turkey. The authorities have launched a wide-range anti-terrorism operation,
started in late July 2015 under the pretext of countering terrorism. In this context, at least 58 curfews
have been imposed in several cities in South East Turkey (Cizre, Sirnak, Sur,
Mardin, Diyarbakir, Hakkâri, Muş, Elazığ and Batman), leading to restrictions
in access to basic services for approximately 1,377,000 people living in these
districts and to the death between August 16, 2015 and March 18, 2016 of at
least 310 civilians (including 62 women, 72 children, 29 people aged over 60)[2]. 
 
The operation turned into a massive
crackdown against peaceful civil society actors depicted as part of “terrorist
networks”. This campaign has been targeting dozens of peaceful activists who
have been involved in the monitoring of human rights violations resulting from
anti-terrorism operations and advocating for a peaceful resolution of the
Kurdish issue. These peaceful activists include human rights defenders, particularly
members of HRFT and the Human Rights
Association (İHD) members, lawyers,
political party representatives, academics and journalists[3]. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Turkey,
urging them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the
physical and psychological integrity of all human rights defenders in Turkey,
including the above-mentioned academics;
 
ii. Drop all charges against all signatory
academics, particularly Ms. Meral Camcı, Ms. Esra Mungan Gürsoy, Mr. Kıvanç
Ersoy and Mr. Muzaffer Kaya and, in the meantime, ensure that any judicial
proceedings against them is carried out in full compliance with the defendants'
right to a fair trial, as protected under international law;
 
iii. Release Ms. Meral Camcı, Ms. Esra
Mungan Gürsoy, Mr. Kıvanç Ersoy and Mr. Muzaffer Kaya immediately and
unconditionally, since their detention is arbitrary as it only aims at
curtailing their human rights activities;
 
iv. Put an end to all acts of harassment,
including at the judicial level, against all human rights defenders in Turkey;
 
v. Put an end to the crackdown on civil
society under the pretext of countering terrorism and recognise the legitimate
role of human rights defenders in line with Turkey’s international
obligations;  
 
vi. Comply with all the provisions of the
United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular with:
- its Article 1, which provides that
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
- its Article 6(a-b-c), which foresees
that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, (a)
to participate in peaceful activities against violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, (b) as provided for in human rights and other applicable
international instruments, freely to publish, impart or disseminate to others
views, information and knowledge on all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
(c) to study, discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law
and in practice, of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through
these and other appropriate means, to draw public attention to those matters”;
- its Article 12.2, which provides that
“the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the
competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others,
against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present
Declaration”;
 
vii. Ensure in all circumstances respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international
human rights standards and international instruments ratified by Turkey.

Addresses:

President of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan,
Fax: (+90 312) 525 58 31, E-mail: contact@tccb.gov.tr Prime Minister of Turkey Ahmet Davutoglu, Fax: +90
(312) 403 62 82 ; Email: ozelkalem@basbakanlik.gov.trMinister of Justice of Turkey
Mr. Kenan Ipek, Fax: +90 (0312) 419 33 70; E-mail: info@adalet.gov.trMinister of Interior of Turkey Mr. Efkan
Ala,Fax: 90 312 418 1795; Email: ozelkalem@icisleri.gov.trAmbassador Izzet Selim Yenel, Diplomatic
Mission of Turkey to the European Union in Brussels, Belgium; Fax: + 32 2 511
04 50Ambassador Mehmet Ferden Çarikçi,
Permanent Mission of Turkey to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax:
+41 22 734 08 59; Email: mission.turkey@ties.itu.int Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy
of Turkey in your respective country. ***Paris-Geneva, April 20, 2016 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.



[1] The 20 university academics and researchers are Associate Prof.
Dr. Aynur Özuğurlu, Associate Prof. Dr. Burcu Yakut Çakar,
Assistant Prof. Dr. Derya Keskin, Associate Prof. Dr. Gül Koksal,
Associate Prof. Dr. Güven Bakırezer, Associate Prof. Dr. Hakan Koçak,
Assistant Prof. Dr. Hülya Kendir, Prof. Dr. Kuvvet Lordoğlu,
Prof. Dr. Mehmet Cengiz Erçin, Assistant Prof. Dr. Mehmet Rauf Kesici,
Assistant Prof. Dr. Mehmet Ruhi Demiray, Prof. Dr. Nilay Etiler,
Prof. Dr. Onur Hamzaoğlu, Associate Prof. Dr. Özlem Özkan, Prof.
Dr. Ümit Biçer, Prof. Dr. Veli Deniz, Associate Prof. Dr. Yücel
Demirer, Prof. Dr. Zelal Ekinci, Research Assistant Adem
Yeşilyurt, and Assistant Prof. Dr. Emek Bayrak.


[2] Data collected by
HRFT Documentation Center.


[3] For more information
see FIDH Press Release of 21 September 2015:
https://www.fidh.org/International-Federation-for-Human-Rights/europe/turkey/turkey-rights-groups-strongly-condemn-escalating-violence-and-human 