Nepal:  Alleged torture in police custody suffered by Mr. Parshuram Chaudhary _OMCT fears for his safety and the risk of impunity
April  5, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2013 / AprilNepal: Alleged torture in police custody suffered by Mr. Parshuram Chaudhary _OMCT fears for his safety and the risk of impunity
NPL 050413
Torture in police custody/ Risk of
impunity
The International
Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT
intervention in the following situation in Nepal.
Brief
description of the situation
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by Advocacy Forum (AF), a
member organisation of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the alleged torture in
police custody suffered by Mr. Parshuram
Chaudhary, a 24-year-old permanent resident of Deudakala VDC-07, Bardiya
district and temporarly living in Boudha, Kathmandu. 
According to the information
received, on 15 February 2013, Mr. Parshuram Chaudhary, a newspaper delivery
boy, was asked to report to the police after his landlord’s house was robbed on
the previous day. He went to Metropolitan Police Circle (MPC), Boudha, where he
was interrogated about the robbery. He was allegedly tortured during the interrogation,
including being beaten with sticks, slapped with palms and kicked with police
boots. This process reportedly continued for about three, four days in every
four, five days’intervals. After that, he was reportedly threatened various
times by Assistant Sub-Inspector (ASI) Umesh Kumar Yadav from Metropolitan Police
Crime Division (MPCD), Hanumandhoka, Kathmandu. The police officer allegedly
called him on his cell phone, asked him to join him and other policemen in
various places, including restaurants and tea shops, and forced him to pay the
bills otherwise he would be sent to jail. 

According to the same information
received, on 2 March 2013, Mr. Parshuram Chaudhary was summoned anew to the
MPC, Boudha, where he was illegally detained for four days. On 5 March 2013, he
was remanded under the charge of public offence and on the following day, he
was allegedly tortured while being again interrogated by ASI Yadav and another
unidentified police constable from MPC on the aforementioned robbery. Mr.
Parshuram Chaudhary was hit in his face, head and other parts of his body with
shoes. He subsequently fell unconscious and when he came round, he was made to
sign a paper, which he was unable to read. He was only taken later to a doctor,
who applied two stitches on the wound and gave him medicines to stop the
bleeding. He was then taken back to MPC, Boudha and detained. 
On 19 March 2013, Mr. Parshuram
Chaudhary was transferred to MPCD, Hanumandhoka, where he was again
interrogated and punched by a plain clothes policeman. The policeman then took
his statement but did not read it out. Fearing police reprisals, Mr. Parshuram
Chaudhary reportedly signed the paper without reading it. He was later brought
back to MPC, Boudha until his release on bail on 29 March 2013. During that
timeframe, he was allegedly transferred various times to MPCD, where he was
interrogated, tortured and threatened with new charges of drug smuggling by
different policemen (senior and junior police officers). As of issuing this
urgent appeal, he was not provided with an arrest warrant, a detention letter, a
receipt of bail deposit nor a release letter. 
The
International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its concern about the safety and
physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Parshuram Chaudhary. OMCT
urges the competent authorities to carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial
investigation into the allegations of torture and ill-treatment, in
accordance with international human rights standards, the result of which must
be made public, in order to bring those responsible before a competent,
independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative
sanctions as provided by law. 
OMCT recalls that
the authorities have to fulfil their obligations under international human
rights law to protect the right not to be subjected to torture or other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and to bringing to justice those
responsible for violating this right.
OMCT recalls that Article 11 of the Convention against
Torture stipulates that “Each State Party shall keep under systematic review
interrogation rules, instructions, methods and practices as well as
arrangements for the custody and treatment of persons subjected to any form of
arrest, detention or imprisonment in any territory under its jurisdiction, with
a view to preventing any cases of torture” and article 15 of the said
Convention, “Each State Party shall ensure that any statement which is
established to have been made as a result of torture shall not be invoked as
evidence in any proceedings (…)”.
Action requested
Please write to
the authorities in Nepal urging them to:
i.              
Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and
psychological integrity of Mr. Parshuram
Chaudhary, his family and the lawyers working
on the case; 
ii.             
Carry out a prompt,
effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the aforementioned
facts, in accordance with international human rights standards, the result of which must
be made public, in orderto bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial
tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by
law;
iii.           
Guarantee that no evidence obtained under torture and
ill-treatment, or threats thereof, be used in court proceedings against Mr. Parshuram Chaudhary as stipulated in
Article 15 of the UN Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
iv.           
Ensure that adequate,
effective and prompt reparation, including adequate compensation and
rehabilitation, is granted to Mr. Parshuram Chaudhary;
v.             
Ensure the respect of human rights and fundamental
freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and
international human rights standards, in particular ensure that all acts of
torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment and punishment are clearly
defined in law as offences in accordance with the provisions set out in
Articles 1, 4 and 16 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and that they be made punishable with
appropriate penalties which take into account the grave nature of the crimes as
required (which is not the case under the 1996 Torture Compensation Act).
Addresses
Ø Prime Minister, Dr. Baburam Bhattarai, Office of the
Prime Minister and Council of Nepal, Singha Darbar, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: +
977-1-4211286, Email: info@opmcm.gov.np 
Ø Inspector General of Police, Mr. Kuber Singh Rana,
Police Head Quarters, Naxal, Kathmandu, Nepal, PO. Box No.: 407, Fax: + 977 1 4
415 593, Email: info@nepalpolice.gov.np
Ø Attorney General, Mr. Mukti Nath Pradhan, Office of
Attorney General Ramshahpath, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: + 977 1 4262582, Email: attorney@mos.com.np,    info@attorneygeneral@gov.np , socialjus@gmail.com 
Ø Chairman of the National Human Rights Commission, Mr.
Kedar Nath Uppadhya, Pulchowck, Lalitpur, Nepal; Email: nhrc@nhrcnepal.org ; complaints@nhrcnepal.org  Fax: + 977 1 5547973
Ø Permanent
Mission of Nepal, 81 rue de la Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: + 4122 7332722, E-mail: mission.nepal@bluewin.ch 
Please also write
to the embassies of Nepal in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 5 April
2013
Kindly inform us
of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 