srael/Lebanon: physical and psychological integrity of Qozet Ibrahim, 25, a free-lance journalist, and Najwa Samhat
April 12, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2000 / Aprilsrael/Lebanon: physical and psychological integrity of Qozet Ibrahim, 25, a free-lance journalist, and Najwa SamhatIsrael: 2 women detained in Khiam    Case ISR 120400.VAW  VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN    The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in South Lebanon, (occupied by Israel).    Brief description of the situation    The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Qozet Ibrahim, 25, a free-lance journalist, and Najwa Samhat, both detained in Khiam Detention Centre.    According to the information from the Public Committee Against Torture in Israel (PCATI), a member of the OMCT network, the medical condition of these two women has severely deteriorated.     It is reported that Najwa Samhat has suffered a severe haemorrhage after having a miscarriage at the detention centre. The same reports added that Qozet Ibrahim suffered from a severe ulcer and that she has been constantly hooked to infusion in her cell because she kept vomiting everything she was eating.  PCATI received information that they were both taken to hospital by Israeli forces and their allied SLA militiamen "after their health conditions deteriorated because of torture at the detention centre".    In light of reports describing harsh detention conditions in Khiam Detention Centre and descriptions of systematic abuse and torture, PCATI is gravely worried that those brutal means had been used against those women and have led to the deterioration of their condition.    OMCT underlines that the detention of these two women is the responsibility of the Israeli authorities and urges them to uphold their right to legal counsel and to a fair and impartial trial and their physical and psychological integrity, as established, inter alia, in the Convention against Torture and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, both ratified by Israel.    Action requested    Please write to the authorities in Israel urging them to:    take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Qozet Ibrahim and Najwa Samhat;  intervene with the appropriate authorities in order to secure that the adequate medical assistance is provided as a matter of urgency to these women;  order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at  all times;  guarantee an immediate investigation into all allegations of torture and ill-treatment, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law;  guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.      Addresses    Ehud Barak, Prime Minister and Minister of Defence, Office of the Prime Minister, 3 Kaplan Street  Hakirya, Jerusalem 91007, Israel, Faxes:	+972 2 566 4838 and +972 3 691 7915    Minister of Justice,Mr. Yossi Beilin, Ministry of Justice, 29 Salah al-Din Street, Jerusalem 91029, State of Israel.  Fax : + 972 2 6285 438    Minister of Defense, Ministry of Defense, 7 "A" Street, Hakirya, Tel Aviv, Israel. Fax: +972 3 697 62 18.    Minister of Police, Ministry of Police, PO Box 18182, 3 Sheikh Jarrah, Kiryat Hamemshala, Jerusalem 91181, State of Israel. Fax : + 972 2 5826 769.    General Antoine Lahad South Lebanon Army, c/o Lieutenant-General Shaul Mufaz, Chief of General Staff, 7 `A' Street, Hakirya, Tel Aviv, Israel  Faxes: 	+97236916940    The Embassy of Israel in your respective countries.    Geneva, April 12, 2000    Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 