Azerbaijan:  Press Release: Investigative journalist Khadija Ismayilova sentenced to 7.5 years in jail
September  1, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Azerbaijan / 2015 / SeptemberAzerbaijan: Press Release: Investigative journalist Khadija Ismayilova sentenced to 7.5 years in jailAzerbaijan_2015.09.01_PR_EN2 pages / 276 KB

PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

Geneva-Paris,
September 1, 2015 – The sentencing of prominent
investigative journalist Khadija Ismayilova to 7.5 years in prison was handed
down today before the Baku Court of Grave Crimes. Arbitrarily detained since
December 5, 2014, her conviction is based on trumped-up charges and aims at
preventing her from carrying out her legitimate activities, the Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders said today.
On September 1, 2015,
the Baku Court of Grave Crimes sentenced Ms. Khadija Ismayilova to 7,5 years imprisonment on charges of embezzlement, illegal entrepreneurship, tax
evasion, and abuse of office. On August 21, the Prosecution
had demanded for her 9 years of jail. 
Internationally
recognised independent reporter[1] and journalist of the Azerbaijani radio Azadliq (“Radio
Freedom”), Ms. Ismayilova was arrested on December 5, 2014 on charges of
"inciting" her ex-partner "to commit suicide". Although in
April 2015 the alleged victim retreated his accusations, claiming his testimony
was given under pressure, blackmail and torture, the prosecution did not take
it into account and maintained the charges. In February 2015, Ms. Ismayilova
was further accused of embezzlement, illegal entrepreneurship, tax evasion and
abuse of office. During the hearings, no evidence of these accusations was
presented. 
The crackdown on civil society, going on in Azerbaijan
since last year, has recently seen other prominent human rights defenders
sentenced on similar trumped up charges: Mr. Rasul Jafarov and Mr. Intigam
Aliyev sentenced in appeal respectively to 6.3 and 7.5 years of jail, and
Ms. Leyla Yunus and Mr. Arif Yunusov sentenced by a lower court
respectively to 8.5 and 7 years in prison[2].
“This is only the last of a series of recent politically motivated
long-term convictions handed down against the most prominent Azeri human rights
defenders.
It is time for the international community to strongly take a stand against
this systematic judicial repression and harassment of human right defenders in
Azerbaijan”, said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
Moreover, Ms.
Ismayilova’s trial that opened on July 24, 2015, fell short of international
human rights standards on fairness of
trial. The hearings were held in a semi-closed format, denying access to
journalists, observers and diplomats. She was kept in glass cage during the
hearings and all the motions filed by the defence were denied. Hereby the
principles of equality of arms and the presumption of innocence were violated
along with the independence of the judiciary and transparent judicial
proceedings. The same pattern characterized all trials against human
rights defenders over the past months.
“We are extremely concerned by the outrageous sentences that are
being handed down against the most prominent independent civil society
representatives in the country and we call upon the Azeri authorities to
immediately and unconditionally release all human rights defenders arbitrarily
detained, and to drop all charges against them, since they only aim at
sanctioning their legitimate human rights activities”, added FIDH President Karim Lahidji.
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in
1997 by FIDH
and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy
situations of repression against human rights defenders.
For more information,
please contact :
FIDH: Lucie Kroening (French / English / Arabic)
- Tel: +33 1 43 55 25 18 (Paris)OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui (French /
English / Spanish) - Tel: +41 22 809 49 24 (Geneva/Brussels)



[1]                She won several
international prizes, among which the Gerd Bucerius Free Press of Eastern
Europe Award by Zeit-Stiftung on May 24, 2012, the Courage of Journalism Award
by the Washington-based International Women’s Media Foundation on October 24,
2012, and the Global Shining Light Award on October 14, 2013. 


[2]                See Observatory Press Releases
of July 23, July 31 and August 13,
2015, on http://www.omct.org
and https://www.fidh.org 