Bahrain:  Call for the immediate release of arbitrarily detained human rights defender Mr. Nabeel Rajab according to the provisions of the Bahraini Code of Criminal Procedure
November 21, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2013 / NovemberBahrain: Call for the immediate release of arbitrarily detained human rights defender Mr. Nabeel Rajab according to the provisions of the Bahraini Code of Criminal ProcedureBAHRAIN_Open Letter to the authorities_ARABIC VERSION2 pages / 102 KB

Attn. Cheikh Hamad bin Issa Al
Khalifa, 
King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 587
 
Cheikh Khalid bin Ali Al Khalifa, 
Minister of Justice and Islamic Affairs, Fax: +973 175 31 284
 
Lt. Gen. Cheikh Rashed bin Abdulla Al Khalifa, Minister of Interior, Fax:+973 17390000.
HE Dr. Salah bin Ali AbdulrahmanMinister of Human Rights Affairs, Fax: +973 171 01 888CC. HE Mr. Nasser Al BelooshiAmbassador of the Kingdom of Bahrain to France, Fax: +33 1 47 20 55 75HE Mr. Yusuf Abdulkarim BucheeriPermanent Representative of the Kingdom of Bahrain to the United Nations Office in Geneva, Fax: +41 22 758 96 50
 
Paris-Geneva,
November 19, 2013
 
Re: Call for
the immediate release of arbitrarily detained human rights defender Mr. Nabeel
Rajab according to the provisions of the Bahraini Code of Criminal Procedure
 
Excellencies,
 
The
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), in the framework of their joint programme, the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, call upon the highest
authorities of Bahrain to guarantee the release of Mr. Nabeel Rajab,
Deputy Secretary General of FIDH, who will have served 3/4 of his sentence on
December 1st, 2013 and is therefore eligible an early release. Mr. Nabeel
Rajab's term as Deputy Secretary General of FIDH has been renewed by the newly
elected International Board of FIDH at the occasion of its first meeting held
in Paris on November 9, 2013. 
 
Mr. Rajab,
President of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR), is serving a two
years' imprisonment sentence for advocating and exercising the right to
peaceful assembly. He has been detained since July 9, 2012.
 
Between
September and December 2012, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders conducted four judicial observation missions to monitor the hearings
in the trial of Mr. Nabeel Rajab. A report presenting the findings of those
observations concluded that the trial in appeal against Mr. Rajab failed to
comply with international standards of fair trial. The entire procedure was
fraught with serious human rights violations from the time of arrest, through
detention, trial and conviction[1].
We consider that Mr. Rajab’s conviction blatantly violates the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) ratified by Bahrain[2], but also a number of basic internationally
recognised human rights such as the right to fair trial. 
 
Though the authorities of Bahrain have committed on
several occasions to implement the recommendations issued by the Bahrain
Independent Commission of Inquiry (BICI), including the release of all
prisoners of opinion, Mr. Nabeel Rajab is still detained. 
 
Accordingly, the Observatory urges the relevant
authorities to comply with both international and domestic laws and release Mr
Rajab without any further delay. The Observatory calls in particular for the
implementation of articles 349, 350, 353 of the Bahraini Code of Criminal
Procedure. According to these provisions, detainees imprisoned for
misdemeanours are eligible for an early release after serving 3/4 of their
sentence given that their conduct and behaviour in prison are satisfactory. 
 
We express
our sincere hope that you will take these considerations and requests into
account. 
 
Yours
sincerely,           
 
Karim
Lahidji                                         Gerald
Staberock
President of FIDH                                 Secretary
General of OMCT



[1] See Observatory
Judicial Observation Mission Report: «Sentenced to Two Years in Prison
for Advocating and Exercising the Right to Peaceful Assembly», released on 14
February, 2013.


[2] Participation in peaceful activities to protest against violations of human rights, including through peaceful assemblies, is protected under international law. 