Mexico:  1 year on OMCT stands in solidarity with victims of Ayotzinapa and their requests for truth and justice
September 28, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Statements / Mexico / 2015 / SeptemberMexico: 1 year on OMCT stands in solidarity with victims of Ayotzinapa and their requests for truth and justice​“Es momento, Presidente, de comprometerse a que este país
cambie y se asegure la verdad y la justicia en Ayotzinapa”
– Relatives and School colleagues #JusticeForAyotzinapa September 26, 2015, Geneva. On the first anniversary of the fatal
events in Iguala, which resulted in the disappearance of 43 students,
3 extrajudicial executions and 18 students injured from the Rural
Normal School of Ayotzinapa (Guerrero), OMCT stands in solidarity with
the victims, aggrieved relatives and the student community of
Ayotzinapa. OMCT calls upon the Mexican authorities to diligently meet the eight demands
conveyed by family members and school colleagues to President Enrique Peña
Nieto on Thursday Sept. 26, 2015:1. Acknowledgement of the legitimacy of the search for truth and
justice and case to remain open; 2. Extension of the mandate of the Interdisciplinary Group of
Independent Experts (GIEI), full and unconditional acceptance and
implementation of its report and recommendations; 3. Investigation to be rethought and retaken by a special
investigative unit under international oversight. It should focus on
1) exhaustive search of the whereabouts of the 43 missing students 2)
comprehensive investigation to determine the criminal liability of those
involved in the atrocious acts, including the responsibility of municipal,
state and federal government officials; 4. Search to be re-launched with the immediate and systematic use
of all technology available; 5. Immediate and dignified attention to those injured and to the
relatives of those of our children and colleagues who were
extrajudicially executed. Victims need to be treated with dignity. Revictimisation
should be avoided by all means; 6. Respect for the Normal Rural School “Isidro Burgos” of Ayotzinapa
and immediate cease of all the attempts to criminalise and stigmatise
the students “normalistas”; 7. Permanent channels of communication to be put in place, ensuring
dignity and respect for the victims; 8. Public and structural actions to address the crisis of impunity,
corruption and widespread human rights violations that Mexico is
currently facing, with the meaningful involvement of victims and
relatives. We call upon the creation of an International Commission
against Impunity and Corruption in Mexico. 