Occupied Palestinian Territory :  Palestine: death in detention of 38 year-old Mr. Suleiman ‘Qweidh Mohammed Abu ‘Amra
August 23, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Occupied Palestinian Territory  / 2001 / AugustOccupied Palestinian Territory : Palestine: death in detention of 38 year-old Mr. Suleiman ‘Qweidh Mohammed Abu ‘AmraCase PAL 230801   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation the Palestine Autonomous Areas.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Palestinian Centre for Human Rights (PCHR), a member of the OMCT network, of the death in detention of 38 year-old Mr. Suleiman ‘Qweidh Mohammed Abu ‘Amra, who was being detained by the Palestinian Military Intelligence Service’s headquarters in Gaza City, the Palestine Autonomous Areas.  According to the information received, Mr. Abu ‘Amra, a father of eight from Deir El-Balah, was arrested by the Palestinian Military Intelligence Service on August 8th, 2001. He was then detained at the Service’s headquarters in Gaza City without his family having been allowed to visit him. On Wednesday August 15th, at around 1 am, his family were informed that he had died of a heart attack during interrogation, and they were asked to retrieve his body from Shifa’ Hospital in Gaza City.  According to the information received, a PCHR lawyer who saw the late Mr. Abu ‘Amra’s body during the morning of August 15th, has stated that there were blue marks on his wrists, back and legs, giving rise to the concern that Mr. Abu ‘Amra may have been tortured during his detention, and that the torture could have played a role in his demise.   According to the information received, PCHR has called for an investigation into Mr. Abu ‘Amra’s death in detention and an autopsy to be performed, with the authorisation of his family, according to order 554 of 1957, which places the responsibility for investigating suspicious deaths on the Attorney General or his representative.  OMCT is gravely concerned about Mr. Abu ‘Amra’s death in detention, as well as the alleged possible use of torture by the Palestinian Military Intelligence Service during interrogation.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in the Palestine Autonomous Areas urging them to:  1.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the alleged torture in detention of Mr. Abu ‘Amra, including an autopsy to identify the causes of his death, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; 2.	guarantee adequate reparation to Mr. Abu ‘Amra’s family; 3.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	President Yasser Arafat, Palestinian Authority, Al-Muntada, Gaza, Palestinian Authority, Telegrams: President Arafat, Palestinian Authority, Gaza, Faxes:	+ 972 8 282 2366 (when voice answers, please ask for fax tone)  ·	Mr Freih Abu Meddein, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, Abu Khadra Building, Omar al-Mukhtar Street, Gaza, Palestinian Authority, Telegrams: Justice Minister, Palestinian Authority, Gaza, Faxes:	+ 972 8 286 7109  ·	Mr Khaled al-Qidreh, Attorney General for the State Security Courts, Police Headquarters, Gaza, Palestinian Authority, Telegrams: Khaled al-Qidreh, Police Headquarters, Gaza, Palestinian Authority, Faxes: + 972 8 282 4253 (when voice answers, please ask for fax tone)  Please also write to the representatives of the Palestine Autonomous Areas in your respective country.  Geneva, August 23rd, 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 