Bangladesh:  Ongoing arbitrary detention of Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan, Secretary of Odhikar and a member of OMCT General Assembly
August 12, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2013 / AugustBangladesh: Ongoing arbitrary detention of Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan, Secretary of Odhikar and a member of OMCT General Assembly

 
TAKE ACTION!
 
Please
take action to call for the release of human rights defender ADILUR
RAHMAN KHAN! To do so, kindly copy the enclosed letter and send it to the address
provided. Kindly inform us of any action undertaken at omct@omct.org,
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. Thank you for taking action!
 
· Ms.
Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, Gona Bhaban, Old Sangsad
Bhaban, Tejgaon, Dhaka, Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 8113243, Email: info@pmo.gov.bd
· Mr.
Muhiuddin Khan Alamgir, Minister for Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs,
Bangladesh Secretariat Building 4, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Email: mkalamgir@yahoo.com; minister@mha.gov.bd;
· Barrister
Shafique Ahmed, Minister for Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Ministry
of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka,
Bangladesh, Email: info@minlaw.gov.bd
· Mr. Hasanul Haq Inu, Honourable Minister, Ministry of
Information, Building # 4 (8th floor), Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka-1000,
Bangladesh. E-mail: minister@moi.gov.bd
· Mr.
Hasan Mahmud Khandaker, Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters,
Phoenix Road, Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh, Email: ig@police.gov.bd 
· H.E.
Mr. Abdul Hannan, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh to the United Nations in Geneva, 65 rue de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva,
Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 46 16, E-mail: mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.int
· Embassy
of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh in Brussels, 29-31 rue J. Jordaens, 1000
Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 646 59 98; Email: bdootbrussels@skynet.be 

Please also
write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Bangladesh in your respective
country as well as to the EU diplomatic missions or embassies in
Bangladesh.
 
 
Your Excellency,
 
I have been informed by the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, about the ongoing arbitrary
detention of Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan, Secretary of the human rights non-governmental
organisation Odhikar, a member of OMCT General Assembly and Executive Committee
Member of Forum Asia.
 
On August 10, 2013, at 10.20 pm, Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan was
arrested by eight or nine men in plain clothes who said they were of the Detective Branch of
Police (DB) as he was returning at his Gulshan residence in Dhaka with his
family. The men, who brought a white microbus apparently belonging to the
United Commercial Bank and a blue and silver coloured mitsubishi pajero, asked
Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan to follow them. They did
not present any warrant of arrest and did not inform neither his family nor Mr.
Rahman
Khan why they were arresting him and where they were taking him. 
 
The
Dhaka Metropolitan Police subsequently confirmed the arrest to the media,
adding that Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan has been arrested under the
Information and Communication Technology Act. The arrest was allegedly
made on the basis of a general diary filed by the police with Gulshan
police station, in relation to the fact-finding report issued by Odhikar about
the killing of 61 people during an operation carried out on May 5-6,
2013 by law enforcement agencies against Hifazat-e Islam activists at the Dhaka’s
downtown
Motijheel area. 
 
After
Odhikar released on June 10, 2013 its fact-finding report on the human rights
violations perpetrated at the Hefazot rally in Motijheel on May 5-6, 2013, the
Information Ministry sent a letter to Odhikar on July 10, 2013 asking
for the names, family names and addresses of the 61 deceased people. In its reply
letter sent to the Information Ministry on July 17, 2013, and concerned for the
security of victims' families, Odhikar requested those concerned to form
an independent impartial commission headed by a retired judge, where Odhikar is
willing to submit the names of the 61 victims killed.
 
On
August 11, 2013, at around 1.20 pm, Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan was brought
before the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate Court (CMM), where the complaint against him was read by the Public
Prosecutor. The complaint, which was only handed over to his lawyers after Mr. Adilur
Rahman Khan was presented before the Court,
was signed by the Dhaka Metropolitan Police. The police lodged two General Diaries
against him on August 10, 2013, one (General Diary number 268, dated August 10)
by the Detective Branch of Police (North) under Section 54 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure and the other (General Diary number 514, dated August 10) by
the Gulshan police station. Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan was also charged under clauses 1 and 2 of Section
57 of the Information and Communication Technology Act 2006 for publishing
false images and information and disrupting the law and order situation of the
country. The complaint also alleges that there would be reasonable suspicion
that Mr. Khan is also directly and indirectly liable for other cognizable
offences. The Public Prosecutor sought a ten-day
remand against Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan
while his lawyers sought bail. The Magistrate, Judge Amit Kumar Dey, rejected the bail petition and placed Mr.
Khan on a five-day remand for interrogation in connection with
publishing a “false report” on casualties during a crackdown on a rally by the
Islamist organisation Hefazat-e Islam on May 5-6, 2013 (See background
information). Mr. Khan was then taken back to the Office of the Detective Branch (DB) of
Dhaka Metropolitan Police at 36 Minto Road, in Dhaka.
 
Furthermore, on August 11, 2013, the Odhikar
office was searched by DB police between 8.20 pm and 9.00 pm.
They inspected the files and documents and then seized three laptops and two
CPUs from Odhikar's office.
 
On 12 August 2013, the High Court of
Bangladesh stayed the five-day remand order to interrogate Mr. Adilur Rahman
Khan and asked police to send him to jail.  A High Court vacation bench
comprised of Justice Borhanuddin and Justice Kashifa Hossain, however, allowed
the Detective Branch to interrogate Mr. Khan at the Dhaka Central Jail gate
premises, if necessary.  The court passed the order after hearing a writ
petition filed by Mr. Khan, challenging the legality of the remand order
granted by Judge Amit Kumar Dey of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate’s Court.
 
On 13 August 2013, Dhaka Metropolitan Magistrate
Mostafa Shahriar Khan, in accordance with the High Court order, issued the
order to send Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan to Dhaka Central Jail.
 
I express my
deepest concern about Mr.
Adilur Rahman Khan's arbitrary detention,
which seems to merely aim at sanctioning his peaceful human rights
activities. Accordingly, I call upon the authorities
in Bangladesh to guarantee in all circumstances his physical and psychological
integrity as well as to release him immediately and unconditionally.
 
More generally, I call upon the authorities in
Bangladesh to put an end to any kind of harassment - including
at the judicial level - against Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan and all human
rights defenders in Bangladesh; as well as to conform
with the provisions of the United Natinos Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9,
1998.
 
I thank you for your attention to
this urgent matter.
 
Sincerely yours,
 


New information
BGD 001 / 0813 / OBS 074.2
Arbitrary detention / 
Judicial harassment
Bangladesh
August
12, 2013
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), has received
new information and requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Bangladesh.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable
sources about the ongoing arbitrary detention of Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan, Secretary of the human
rights non-governmental organisation Odhikar, a member of OMCT General Assembly
and Executive Committee Member of Forum Asia[1].
 
According
to the information received, on August 11, 2013, at around 1.20 pm, Mr.
Adilur
Rahman Khan was brought before the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate Court (CMM),
where the complaint against him was
read by the Public Prosecutor. The complaint, which was only handed over to his
lawyers after Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan was presented before the Court, was signed by the Dhaka
Metropolitan Police. The police lodged two General Diaries against him on
August 10, 2013, one (General Diary number 268, dated August 10) by the
Detective Branch of Police (North) under Section 54 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure and the other (General Diary number 514, dated August 10) by the Gulshan
police station. Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan was also charged under clauses 1 and 2 of Section
57 of the Information and Communication Technology Act 2006 for publishing
false images and information and disrupting the law and order situation of the
country. The complaint also alleges that there would be reasonable suspicion
that Mr. Khan is also directly and indirectly liable for other cognizable
offences. The Public Prosecutor sought a ten-day
remand against Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan while his lawyers sought bail. The
Magistrate, Judge Amit Kumar Dey, rejected the bail petition and placed Mr. Khan on a
five-day remand for interrogation in connection with publishing a “false
report” on casualties during a crackdown on a rally by the Islamist
organisation Hefazat-e Islam on May 5-6, 2013 (See background information). Mr. Khan was then
taken back to the Office
of the Detective Branch (DB) of Dhaka Metropolitan Police at 36 Minto Road, in
Dhaka.
 
Furthermore, on August 11, 2013, the Odhikar
office was searched by DB police between 8.20 pm and 9.00 pm.
They inspected the files and documents and then seized three laptops and two
CPUs from Odhikar's office.
 
The Observatory reiterates
its deepest concern about Mr.
Adilur Rahman Khan's arbitrary detention,
which seems to merely aim at sanctioning his peaceful human rights
activities, and calls upon the authorities in
Bangladesh to guarantee in all circumstances his physical and psychological
integrity as well as to release him immediately and unconditionally.
 
Background information:
On August 10, 2013, at 10.20 pm, Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan was
arrested by eight or nine men in plain clothes who said they were of the Detective Branch of
Police (DB) as he was returning at his Gulshan residence in Dhaka[2] with his
family. The men, who brought a white microbus apparently belonging to the United
Commercial Bank and a blue and silver coloured mitsubishi pajero, asked Mr.
Adilur Rahman Khan to follow them. They did
not present any warrant of arrest and did not inform neither his family nor Mr.
Rahman
Khan why they were arresting him and where they were taking him. 
 
On August 11, 2013, at 2:00 am, Odhikar defenders went to
the Gulshan police, where the police present denied having any case against Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan and claimed that they
learnt of his arrest from the media. Odhikar defenders also went to the DB
office at 12:30 am on August 11, where the sentries denied them entry. At about
3:00 am, Mr. Khan’s wife returned to the Gulshan police station and tried to
lodge a General Diary. The duty officer there refused to accept it, stating that
it was a “sensitive case”. She demanded to speak to the Officer in Charge of
the police station and when he was called up, he also refused to accept it.
 
The Dhaka
Metropolitan Police subsequently confirmed the arrest to the media, adding that
Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan has been arrested under the Information
and Communication Technology Act. The arrest was allegedly made on
the basis of a general diary filed by the police with Gulshan police station, in
relation to the fact-finding report issued by Odhikar about the killing
of 61 people during an operation carried out on May 5-6, 2013
by law enforcement agencies against Hifazat-e Islam activists at the Dhaka’s
downtown
Motijheel area. 
 
After
Odhikar released on June 10, 2013 its fact-finding report on the human rights violations
perpetrated at the Hefazot rally in Motijheel on May 5-6, 2013, the Information
Ministry sent a letter to Odhikar on July 10, 2013 asking for the
names, family names and addresses of the 61 deceased people. In its reply
letter sent to the Information Ministry on July 17, 2013, and concerned for the
security of victims' families, Odhikar requested those concerned to form
an independent impartial commission headed by a retired judge, where Odhikar is
willing to submit the names of the 61 victims killed.
 
Action requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Bangladesh, urging them to:
 
i. Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological
integrity of Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan and of
all human rights defenders in Bangladesh;
 
ii. Release Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan immediately and
unconditionally as his detention is arbitrary since it only aims at
sanctioning his human rights activities; 
 
iii.
Put an end to any kind of harassment - including at the judicial level -
against Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan and all human rights defenders
in Bangladesh;
 
iv. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9,
1998, especially:
-       its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually
and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”, as well as
-       its Article 12.2, which provides that the State shall “take all
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence,
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise
of his or her rights”; 
v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Bangladesh.
 
Addresses:
 
Ms. Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister,
     Office of the Prime Minister, Gona Bhaban, Old Sangsad Bhaban, Tejgaon,
     Dhaka, Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 8113243, Email: info@pmo.gov.bdMr. Muhiuddin Khan Alamgir, Minister
     for Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat
     Building 4, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Email: mkalamgir@yahoo.com;
     minister@mha.gov.bd;Barrister Shafique Ahmed, Minister
     for Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Ministry of Law, Justice and
     Parliamentary Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Email: info@minlaw.gov.bdMr. Hasanul
     Haq Inu, Honourable Minister, Ministry of Information, Building # 4 (8th
     floor), Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh. E-mail: minister@moi.gov.bdMr. Hasan Mahmud Khandaker,
     Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, Phoenix Road,
     Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh, Email: ig@police.gov.bd
H.E. Mr. Abdul Hannan, Ambassador, Permanent
     Mission of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh to the United Nations in
     Geneva, 65 rue de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 46
     16, E-mail: mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.intEmbassy of the People’s Republic of
     Bangladesh in Brussels, 29-31 rue J. Jordaens, 1000 Brussels, Belgium,
     Fax: +32 2 646 59 98; Email: bdootbrussels@skynet.be

 
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or
embassies of Bangladesh in your respective country as well as to the EU diplomatic missions or embassies in Bangladesh.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, August 12, 2013
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the
protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in
their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22
809 49 29
·       Tel and fax
FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80



[1] Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan has also
been the Deputy Attorney
General during the erstwhile four-party alliance government.


[2] The Odhikar office and Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan's home are situated in
the same building. 