Kenya:  Looking at the 2017 elections, is civil society beyond the brink?  -  Preliminary findings of a fact-finding mission on the situation on human rights defenders and NGOs
October 28, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Kenya / 2016 / OctoberKenya: Looking at the 2017 elections, is civil society beyond the brink?  -  Preliminary findings of a fact-finding mission on the situation on human rights defenders and NGOsKenya_281016_PR_Mission2 pages / 195 KB

THE OBSERVATORY -
PRESS RELEASE

 
KENYA: Looking at the 2017 elections, is civil society
beyond the brink?
 
Preliminary findings of a fact-finding mission on the
situation on human rights defenders and NGOs
 
 
Geneva-Nairobi-Paris, October 28, 2016 – “The Kenyan authorities have the responsibility to
protect civil society organisations and defenders, rather than harass them”,
said the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (a joint
OMCT-FIDH partnership), following a fact-finding mission to Kenya. In the context of the upcoming elections, high levels of police violence and patterns
of criminalisation, especially during peaceful demonstrations and
counter-terrorism actions, are two of the main concerns identified by the
mission. In addition, civil society has been for too long waiting for an
adequate legal framework ensuring an enabling environment, free from abuse and
arbitrariness.
 
The delegation, who conducted a fact-finding mission
to Kenya from October 24 to 28, met with several representatives of the Kenyan
civil society, ranging from international to grassroots
organisations, from the capital and other
regions of the country. The delegates also met with several national
authorities such as the Kenyan National Commission on Human Rights, the
Parliamentary Caucus on Human Rights, the National Police Service, the
Independent Policing Oversight Authority, the Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions and the Judiciary, as well as with the diplomatic community in
Nairobi. 
 
The three mission delegates highlighted
three major areas of concern that severely undermine the very existence
of an enabling environment for human rights defenders to freely and
legitimately operate.
                    
First, the high levels of police violence often
experienced and reported by human rights defenders, especially when trying to
hold accountable public officials for the violations committed, put at risk their
physical and psychological integrity. These acts of violence include acts of
torture, enforced disappearances and extra-judicial killings, including under
the guise of combating criminality through “security” and “counter-terrorism” operations.
 
“The killing of Willie Kimani, Kenyan human
rights lawyer, last June, is only the tip of the iceberg of a worrisome pattern
of extrajudicial killings, which appear to be increasing and which aim at
silencing dissenting voices and perpetuating police and other security forces’
impunity. We urge the competent national authorities to end the widespread
impunity for such cases and ensure speedy investigations and prosecutions in
order to hold perpetrators to account”, declared Peter Zangl, Representative of the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT) to the European Union, who led the mission. 
 
Second, the increasing pattern of criminalisation and
intimidation of human rights defenders, including those participating in legal
and peaceful demonstrations, through trumped-up charges, episodes of frequent
arrests, detentions in police stations and long legal processes, represent a
serious concern for the delegation, since they are used as a mean to exhaust
defenders and paralyse their work. Moreover, the unreasonable use of force in
managing public protests call into question the prevailing standards in crowd
control and their actual use by the police. 
 
“We call for
sustained police reforms that transpose into reality the constitutional
fundamental rights to freedom of expression, peaceful and unarmed assembly and
association of all Kenyan citizens. In regards to the constitutional right to
bail, a transparent and proportionate implementation of the bail and bond
policy is urgently needed in order to ensure that it is not used as a form of
punishment against human rights defenders to repress social protest”, said Benson Olugbuo, Executive Director of CLEEN
Foundation, who was a delegate of the mission.
 
Third, the delays
in the commencement of the Public Benefit Organisations Act 2013 (PBO Act),
which streamlines regulation of
NGOs, has left the door open for abuses and administrative harassment of civil
society organisations (CSOs). As a result, CSOs continue to operate within a
hostile environment, characterized by threats of arbitrary de-registrations and
asset freezes, continuous attacks and smearing campaigns. It is worrying and a
reason of real concern that the past two years have witnessed various failed
attempts to restrict such legislation through draconian amendments, aiming at
undermining its significant improvements.
 
“We
welcome the long awaited operationalization of the PBO Act, which represents a
positive step for opening the space for civil society work in Kenya. However, we
urge the Kenyan authorities to ensure that the regulations and bodies that will
be created, as well as possible proposed further amendments, will not seek to
restrict the rights guaranteed by the Act”, highlighted Chiara Cosentino, OMCT Human Rights Officer, who was
also a delegate of the mission.
 
The Observatory calls upon the Kenyan authorities,
especially in view of the upcoming elections, to publicly recognise the
legitimate and crucial role of civil society and human rights defenders as
pillars of every democracy and watchdogs of the rule of law, and to protect
them in all circumstances from any kind of harassment.
 
A mission report will be issued in the coming months
and will present detailed conclusions and recommendations to the Kenyan
authorities, the United Nations, the African Union, the East African Community,
the European Union and other international stakeholders.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme
is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human
rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights
Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 

For more information, please
contact:
• OMCT: Chiara Cosentino: +41228094937
• FIDH:
Arthur Manet / Audrey Couprie: + 33143552518 