Iran:  Pressure against human rights defenders continues
October 18, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2013 / OctoberIran: Pressure against human rights defenders continues

Paris-Geneva, October 18, 2013. While
international relationships between Iran and western countries have been
warming up, progress on human rights remains to be seen. Dozens of human rights
defenders continue to serve prison sentences and dozens of others are awaiting
court decisions in retaliation for their human rights work. The Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), was recently informed that the six-year sentence against Mr. Mohammad
Seifzadeh, a prominent human rights lawyer and founding member of the Defenders
of Human Rights Centre (DHRC), had been confirmed by an appeal court. 
 
Late September 2013, Branch
54 of the Appeals Court upheld a sentence of six years’ imprisonment earlier
imposed on Mr. Mohammad Seifzadeh on February 20, 2013 by Branch 15 of
the Islamic Revolution Court on charges of “collusion to take action against
the national security” and “spreading propaganda against the system”. 
 
The February 20 sentence
came shortly before he was due to be released on March 25, 2013 at the end of a
two-year sentence he was serving for similar charges. The new charges are based
on a letter he had written to former President Khatami on July 21, 2011 as well
as other letters he had co-signed with other persons. In the July 2011 letter,
he mentioned the widespread breach of the law in the judiciary and stated that
there was no solution but to dissolve illegal authorities such as the Islamic
Revolution Courts and the Special Clergy Court and to reform the structure of
the judiciary. Furthermore, he said due process and citizen rights had not been
respected in the case of about 200 political prisoners in Section 350 of Evin
prison, where he was being held at the time.
 
In protest against the
illegality and bias of the Islamic Revolution Court, Mr. Seifzadeh refused to
attend the trial that resulted in the first instance sentence in question.
Although he had similar concerns about the integrity of the Appeals Court, he
attended its session out of respect for his family's opinion.
 
The current state of his
health is worrisome, especially given the conditions of his detention since his
illegal transfer in late December 2012 to the remote Rajaishahr prison near the
city of Karaj even though his sentence does not include “imprisonment in
internal exile”[1].
He is in dire need of eye surgery, dental treatment and care for his knees,
neck and back disc. He is also suffering from kidney trouble for which he was
transferred to a hospital outside the prison for treatment in February 2013.
Furthermore, he is suffering from heart ailment for which he has reportedly
been transferred to hospital on October 15, 2013.
 
The sentencing in appeal of
Ms. Massoumeh Dehghan, the wife of detained
lawyer and also a founding member of DHRC Abdolfattah Soltani, to one-year of suspended
imprisonment is another case for concern. The appeals court issued its verdict
on March 10, 2013 but it had not been publicised earlier[2].

 
The Observatory urges the Iranian authorities to
immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Mohammad Seifzadeh as well as all
human rights defenders presently detained in the country, to put an end to any
kind of harassment against them and to guarantee in all circumstances their
physical and psychological integrity, in line with the United Nations
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and international human rights instruments ratified by Iran.



[1]
Although
‘imprisonment in internal exile’ does not exist in the law, some prisoners are
sentenced to it.


[2] For more details, see Observators
Press Release, November 20, 2012. 