Honduras:  Human Rights Council: Joint intervention OMCT - RCT: General debate_Situation in Honduras
September 22, 2009
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Events / Honduras / 2009 / SeptemberHonduras: Human Rights Council: Joint intervention OMCT - RCT: General debate_Situation in HondurasPlease check against delivery    HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL 12th session (14 September – 2 October 2009) Item 4: General debate (22 September 2009) Human rights situations that require the Council’s attention  Oral statement delivered by The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the Rehabilitation and Research Centre for Torture Victims (RCT), two non-governmental organisations in general consultative status   Mr. President, The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the Rehabilitation and Research Centre for Torture Victims (RCT) wish to avail themselves of this general debate to address the human rights situation in Honduras.  OMCT and RCT are gravely concerned about the human rights violations occurring in the country under the de facto Government, since the coup d’état on 28 June 2009. OMCT and RCT have received several reliable allegations and credible reports of a wide range of human rights violations committed by the police and the armed forces, notably (extrajudicial) killings, disappearances in police custody, disproportionate use of force by law enforcement officials, large scale arbitrary detention of, and death threats against students, human rights defenders, journalists and other persons in connection with peaceful demonstrations against the coup d’état. Several cases of torture and ill-treatment, including rape and other gender based violence, have also been reported. The acts of torture and ill-treatment have reportedly taken place in police custody, often in illegal improvised detention centers (for example on the premises of the Batallón de los Comandos de la Fuerzas Especiales de la Policía (COBRAS), premises only designed to serve as a training camp). In certain cases that were reported, the acts of torture and ill-treatment were used in order to punish the victims either for actions undertaken prior to the coup d’état, such as in connection with the promotion of the planned popular referendum, or for peacefully protesting against the coup d’état. Within this particular context, both organisations are gravely concerned about the safety of the people of Honduras, especially of outspoken journalists and human rights defenders, but also of ordinary citizens who have either actively or passively opposed the coup d’état and the human rights violations committed by or with the consent or acquiescence of the de facto government. It is our assessment that there is a real risk that more violations of fundamental human rights may take place. OMCT and RCT call on the Human Rights Council as a matter of urgency to address the violations of fundamental human rights and freedoms, including torture, arbitrary detention, extrajudicial killings, threats and general intimidation of people opposing the coup d’état and others by promptly dispatching an investigation mission to Honduras, which should include relevant Special Procedures mandate holders, in particular the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, the Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers, the Special Rapporteur on human rights defenders, the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences and the Working Group on arbitrary detention. OMCT and RCT further wish to urge the de facto Government of Honduras to fully implement the recommendations and precautionary measures issued by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) since the coup. Finally, both organisations call on the international community to take all necessary measures to seek a peaceful solution to the political crisis in Honduras and to press for the prompt return to a democratic constitutional order respectful of the rule of law, human rights and fundamental freedoms. Thank you, Mr. President. 