Israel:  Israel and Palestinian Territory Occupied: denial of access to medical care in Israeli prisons
September 18, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2003 / SeptemberIsrael: Israel and Palestinian Territory Occupied: denial of access to medical care in Israeli prisonsCase ISR 180903.ESCR Economic, Social and Cultural Rights Concern Denial of Access to Medical Care/Deteriorating Health Conditions of Two Palestinian Detainees   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Israel.   Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Public Committee against Torture in Israel (PCATI), a member of OMCT network, that two Palestinian detainees in Israeli prisons are being denied access to medical assistance in spite of their deteriorating health conditions and repeated requests for such assistance.   Mr. Daoud Halmi Mohammed Seder (ID 911721280), 21 years old, was arrested on April 14th 2003 at his home in Hebron and is currently detained in the Shikma Detention Centre. Mr. Seder had reportedly previously been hurt by an electric shock and had to get 59 stitches. As a result, Mr. Seder is suffering from a chronic skin condition on his stomach, which necessitates special medical treatment that includes the cleansing of the damaged skin and its exposure to sunlight. Since his arrest, Mr. Seder hasn't, so far, received any medical attention. His request for medical care and for being transferred to a cell with window has been refused. The prison doctor reportedly advised him to use the butter that he receives with his food as an ointment to rub on the affected skin. As a result of very hot weather and lack of medical care, the condition of Mr. Seder's skin has seriously deteriorated. He is currently suffering from intense itching and blotches have appeared on his body.   Mr. Louie Ibrahim Hassan Malesh (ID 905750626) was arrested on March 27th 2003 at his home in Bethlehem. He was detained at the Russian Compound Detention Centre in Jerusalem until his transfer, in May 20th 2003 to the Nitzan detention centre in Ramle where he is currently held. According to the information received, Mr. Malesh suffers from acute pains in a left molar tooth in his lower jaw, which provokes insomnia. Before his arrest, Mr. Malesh was reportedly undergoing a special treatment by a dentist, but his arrest put a stop to the treatment before its completion. It is reported that Mr. Malesh repeatedly requested medical attention to the prison administration without success. According to the information received, Mr. Malesh is also suffering from pains in his eyes, a deterioration of his vision and violent headaches. He has reportedly been asking medical cares for a month but hasn't seen any doctor yet, the prison administration telling him to wait.   Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Israel urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the persons mentioned above, including their immediate access to medical care; ii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these events, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law;  iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards such as the Fourth Geneva Convention and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights;   Addresses  ·	Ariel Sharon, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, 3 Kaplan Street, PO Box 187, Kiryat Ben-Gurion, Jerusalem 91919, Israel. Fax: + 972 2 6705475, E-mail: rohm@pmo.gov.il, pm_eng@pmo.gov.il  ·	Yosef Lapid, Minister of Justice, 29 Salah Eddin Street, Jerusalem 91010, Israel. Fax: + 972 2 628 5438, E-mail: sar@justice.gov.il    ·	Elyakim Rubinstein, Attorney-General/Legal Adviser to the Government, Ministry of Justice, 29 Salah al-Din Street, Jerusalem 91010, Israel, Fax: +972 2 6285438 / 3 5694370   ·	Ambassador Yaakov Levy, Av. de la Paix 1-3, CH-1202, Genève, Suisse, e-mail: mission.israel@gva.mfa.gov.il, fax: +4122 716 05 55   Please also write to the embassies of Israel  in your respective country.   Geneva, September 18, 2003   Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 