Guatemala:  Human rights defenders at risk, unprotected and criminalised by the State: Conclusions from an international mission
March 13, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Guatemala / 2015 / MarchGuatemala: Human rights defenders at risk, unprotected and criminalised by the State: Conclusions from an international missionGuatemala_PR_2015.03.13_English2 pages / 325 KBGeneva-Paris-Guatemala City, March 13, 2015: The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders and UDEFEGUA call on the Guatemalan
authorities to put an end to the practice of criminalising human rights
defenders in Guatemala and welcome the authorities’ commitment to implement
public policies to protect defenders in collaboration with civil society.
 
Defending
human rights in Guatemala is a high-risk activity due to the increasing number
of attacks against defenders. Despite a comprehensive legal and institutional
framework, human rights defenders in Guatemala work in extremely vulnerable
conditions, which demonstrates the State’s lack of willingness and capacity to
enable a safe and free working environment for defenders.
 
The
Observatory and UDEFEGUA point out that there are insufficient mechanisms to
address social conflicts through dialogue and consultation and tackle the
structural problems that cause them. On the contrary, the trend is to
excessively adopt criminalising measures that only exacerbate the
aforementioned social tensions. 
 
Our
organisations also denounce the fact that in Guatemala human rights defenders
are persistently denied justice. What is most striking is how the legal cases
against them are processed with speed and efficiency whilst the legal claims
lodged by human rights defenders in defence of their own rights remain
unanswered.
 
Furthermore, in Guatemala there is a tendency to pass strict laws that
criminalise the activities of human rights defenders, i.e.
‘Ley de Túmulos’ (Traffic
Circulation and Obstruction of Roads Law) and the ‘Ley de Terrorismo Comercial’ (Commercial
Terrorism Law), that is currently under debate in the Congress of the Republic
of Guatemala. Therefore, the competent public authorities, such as the Human
Rights Ombudsman and the Congressional Human Rights Commission, should systematically
release legal opinions on any draft legislation that could affect human rights.
 
Lastly,
the Observatory and UDEFEGUA are pleased to announce that, during the dialogue
with the mission, several country authorities, and primarily the Human Rights
Ombudsman, have committed to creating a roundtable for high-level dialogue
including Guatemalan civil society in order to implement public policies aiming
to protect human rights defenders, as ruled by the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights in the case Human Rights
Defenders et al. v Guatemala.
 
Context:
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights and the UDEFEGUA undertook
a fact-finding mission in Guatemala from February 23 – 27, 2015 to establish a
dialogue on the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report
published on Monday, February 23, 2015 entitled ‘Más Pequeños que David: the
struggle of Human Rights Defenders in Guatemala’.
 
The mission
was comprised of the following members: Jael Quiroga, President of REINICIAR
and member of the OMCT Executive Council (Colombia); Miguel Martín
Zumalacárregui, OMCT Coordinator of the Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (Spain); Claudia Samayoa, President of UDEFEGUA and member of
the OMCT General Assembly (Guatemala); and Jorge Santos, Vice President of
UDEFEGUA.
 
The
Observatory and UDEFEGUA mission would like to extend their thanks to the
public authorities that participated in the interviews and meetings: the
Attorney General of the Republic, the Special Prosecutor for Human Rights, the
Human Rights Ombudsman, the President of Presidential Human Rights Commission
(COPREDEH), the Congressional Human Rights Commission, the Ministry of
Interior, and the National Institute of Forensic Sciences. The mission also met
with the Office of the High Commissioner of the United Nations for Human
Rights.
 
The mission
also heard testimonies from representatives of the civil society organisations
involved in protecting human rights, and specifically land rights, during
meetings held both in Guatemala City and the town of Huehuetenango. It also
visited in prison Antonio Rogelio and Saúl Aurelio, two human rights defenders from the
community of Santa Cruz Barillas who have been criminalised.
 
 The Report is available for download:
in Spanish: OBS_InformeCompleto_Guatemala_ES_20150223
in English: OBS_Guatemala_FullReport_English_20150223 The Documentary “Más pequeños que david” is available here:Original Version in Spanish: 



Subtitled in English:Subtitled in French:
You can participate
via social networking sites using the hashtag #MasPequeñosQueDavid.
 
 
For more information on the Report or Documentary,
please contact:
 
·        
OMCT: Miguel Martín
Zumalacárregui: + 41 22 809 49 24
·        
FIDH: Arthur Manet: +
33 1 43 55 25 18 / José Carlos Thissen: + 51 95 41 31 650
·        
UDEFEGUA: Claudia
Samayoa: +502 5018-4603
 
 
If you wish to arrange interviews with the mission
delegates during the mission, please contact:
 
·        
UDEFEGUA: Claudia
Samayoa: +502 5018-4603 