Colombia:  Colombia: displacement of thousands of persons fleeing paramilitary forces
April 13, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Colombia / 2001 / AprilColombia: Colombia: displacement of thousands of persons fleeing paramilitary forcesCase COL 130401 The International Secretariat of the OMCT requests your intervention in the following situation in Colombia. Brief description of the situation: The International Secretariat of the OMCT, has received information from the National Association of Solidarity Aid (Asociación Nacional de Ayuda Solidaria - ANDAS), a member of the OMCT network, about the displacement of at least 7,000 persons now fleeing from the paramilitary forces.   According to the information received, at least 7,000 persons, mostly Indigenous Paeces, are in a very precarious situation, vulnerable and fleeing unprotected from the paramilitaries who are advancing on the Camino Real del Naya, south of the Department of the Cauca Valley.  The reports point out that the civilian population was alerted during the afternoon of April 10 to the presence of at least 500 men of the Autodefensas Unidas de Colombia that mobilized by the only approaches to the reserve. This circumstance has led to the exodus towards the city of Buenaventura across very rough terrain.  The lives of the infirm, the old, young and women are particularly at risk as they must use dangerous jungle paths which cross deep gorges and large rivers. In addition to this, the approach to Puerto Merisalde and Buenaventura presents particular danger because several months ago the paramilitaries set up permanent squads. Last March 16, when the Army abandoned the Municipality of Timba’s administrative centre, the area was literally invaded by the paramilitaries, who turned up completely uniformed and armed, in the most absolute impunity.  Since that date they have killed at least 15 persons in Timba’s administrative centre and invaded the districts in the higher area of the Municipality of Buenos Aires, among others, La Esperanza, La Alsacia y El Ceral. Moreover, a week ago, they set up a camp in the indigenous reserve of La Paila, where they are still intimidating the population, moving in squads and controlling the passage of people and food. Yesterday, during the afternoon, they confiscated the indigenous community’s only vehicle. In spite of the countless appeals that have been made to the National Government from different parties, up to the present there has been no action by the Army to contain the action and the advance of the paramilitaries. The Prosecutor’s Office, located less than an hour from the city of Cali,  has been unable to reach Timba in order to document the killings that the paramilitaries have been committing or to remove the numerous corpses that have been thrown into the Cauca River. In addition,  no action has been taken by the provincial governments of del Valle or el Cauca to provide assistance to the population that is isolated as a result of the paramilitary action.  Requested Action:  Please write to the Colombian Authorities urging them to:  i. take all measures necessary to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned communities and to bring an end to violent events against them; ii. order a thorough and impartial investigation into the above-mentioned events, especially the reports of torture, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to justice and apply the civil, penal or administrative sanctions stipulated by law; iii. fully execute the recommendations made by international and regional human rights organisations, including those of the High Commission for Human Rights, the United Nations Human Rights Commission, the Inter.American Human Rights Commission as well as national and governmental human rights organisations; iv. guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental liberties in all the country in accordance with national law and international human rights norms.  Addresses  · S.E. Álvaro Uribe Vélez, Presidente de la República, Cra. 8 n .7-26, Palacio de Nariño, Santafé de Bogotá. Fax: (+57 1) 566 20 71  · Consejería Presidencial de Derechos Humanos, Calle 7 n . 6-54 Piso 3, Santafé de Bogotá, D. C. Fax: (+57 1) 337 13 51  · General Fernando Tapias Stahelin, Comandante de las Fuerzas Militares, Avenida el Dorado con Cra. 52, Santafé de Bogotá. Fax: (+57 1) 222 29 35; e-mail: siden@mindefensa.gov.co ; pilaque@cgm.mil.co · Mission Permanente de la Colombie auprès de l’Office de las Nations Unies et des institutions spécialisées a Genève. Chemin du Champ d’Anier 17-19, 1209 Genève. Tel : (+41) 22 798 4554, 798 4555. E-mail: mission.colombia@ties.itu.int  Please also write to the embassies of Colombia in your respective country.  Geneva, April 13, 2001 