Congo, Democratic Republic:  D.R. Congo: Mgr Kataliko returns to Bukav
September 15, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Congo, Democratic Republic / 2000 / SeptemberCongo, Democratic Republic: D.R. Congo: Mgr Kataliko returns to BukavCase COD 311001 Arbitrary arrest  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by Committee of Human Rights Observers (CODHO), a member of the OMCT network, of the arbitrary arrests of Mr. José Mafwata Shamba in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo.  According to information received, Mr. José Mafwata Shamba was summoned without reason and without an arrest warrant on 4 October 2001, in the Boulevard du 30 juin in Kinshasa, outside the "Sabena" offices by members of the Détection militaire des activités anti-patrie (military intelligence)/Department of the Interior (DEMIAP).  He is being held in the DEMIAP jail and has not been allowed to receive any visitors since he was arrested.  According to information received, Mr. Shamba is the Secretary General of the Rassemblement National Populaire (RNP) party, the president of which, Mr. Manda Mobutu, is in exile in France.  Mr. Shamba allegedly arrived in Kinshasa on 29 September 2001, not only for family reasons, but also to undertake the formalities required to legalise the RNP.  The International Secretariat is deeply concerned by this arbitrary arrest which appears to be for essentially for political motives, and fears that Mr. José Mafwata Shamba may be subjected to torture while in detention.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in the Democratic Republic of Congo urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to safeguard the physical and psychological integrity of Mr- José Mafwata Shamba;  ii.	order his immediate release in the absence of valid accusations, or if appropriate, to bring him before an impartial and competent court of law while guaranteeing his procedural rights at all times;  iii.	guarantee respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.   Addresses  ·	H.E. Mr. Laurent-Désiré Kabila, President of the Republic, Présidence de la République, Kinshasa-Ngaliema.  Fax : (+243) 12 33 109 or 880 20 00  ·  e-mail : upp@ic.cd ·	H.E. Mr. Mwemze Kongolo, Minister of Justice, Ministère de la Justice, BP 3137, Kinshasa-Gombe ·	H.E. Mr. Gatean Kakudji, Minister of State of the Interior, Hôtel du Conseil Exécutif, Kinshasa-Gombe  Please also write to the embassy of the Democratic Republic of Congo in your country.  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.  Geneva, 31 October 2001 