Concrete steps towards better protection of human rights defenders
March 15, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / 2012 / MarchConcrete steps towards better protection of human rights defenders

PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY
 
Concrete steps towards better protection of human rights 
defenders
 
Geneva-Paris, March 15, 2012. On March 8 and 9, 2012, the Observatory for the Protection of Human 
Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture 
(OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), organised the 
fourth “inter-mechanisms” meeting, 
which was hosted by the Office of the United Nations (UN) High Commissioner for 
Human Rights (OHCHR) in Geneva, Switzerland.

On that occasion, international and regional mechanisms and 
programmes for the protection of human rights defenders - operating within the 
United Nations, 
the African 
Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights (ACHPR), the Council of Europe, 
the Inter-American 
Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) and the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions 
and Human Rights - joined by representatives of the European Union, the 
International Organisation of the 
Francophonie and various NGOs, 
discussed the drafting of a joint report on existing standards and recommendations related to 
the protection of human rights defenders at the international and regional levels. IACHR offered to take a 
coordinating role in drafting the report, with the back up of the Observatory. 
This report would be inspired by the 2011 Commentary 
of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders by the UN Special Rapporteur on 
Human Rights Defenders and the IACHR 
Second Report on the Situation of Human Rights Defenders. Such a document, 
the first of its kind, will not only be a useful tool to human rights defenders, 
States and other relevant stakeholders, but will also demonstrate a unity of 
approaches among mechanisms.
 
Participants also shared their experiences and lessons learnt in order to identify possible ways to 
strengthen the coordination and cooperation among existing mandates on the 
protection of human rights defenders. In particular, action-oriented discussions focused on how to ensure 
accountability for human rights violations against human rights 
defenders, which is a central issue for all mechanisms and programmes in 
order to combat impunity. 
 
Participants also discussed core policy challenges affecting 
the protection of human rights defenders in relation to freedom of 
association, as well as possibilities of cooperation with the newly 
appointed UN Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly 
and of association. A specific focus on the right to receive and access funding, 
including foreign funding was discussed, reflecting renewed preoccupations by 
mechanisms on restrictions by States in this regard. 
 
These issues should be further discussed during a future 
inter-mechanisms meeting, to be organised by the 
Observatory.
 
For more information, please contact : 

• OMCT : Delphine Reculeau : + 41 22 809 49 
39• FIDH : Karine Appy / Arthur Manet : + 33 1 43 55 25 
18
 Or go to the
"inter-mechanisms’ website: http://www.humanrights-defenders.org 