India:  Harassment and restrictions to freedom of association of Indira Jaising and Anand Grover, founders of Lawyers Collective
June  8, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / India / 2016 / JuneIndia: Harassment and restrictions to freedom of association of Indira Jaising and Anand Grover, founders of Lawyers Collective


IND 002 / 0616 / OBS
046
Harassment /
Restrictions
to freedom of association /
                                                                                                            Restrictions
to funding
India
June 8, 2016

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme
of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent intervention in the
following situation in India. 
Description of the
situation:

The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the harassment and restrictions to freedom of association of Ms. Indira Jaising and Mr. Anand
Grover, lawyers and founders of the Indian NGO Lawyers Collective (LC).
Both Ms. Jaising and Mr. Grover are internationally renowned human right
professionals who have been engaging with the United Nations (UN) system, Ms.
Jaising being appointed as former member of the UN Committee against Every form
of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) and Mr. Grover as former UN Special
Rapporteur on the Right to Health. LC is a prominent public interest service
provider in India with an established record of setting high standards
in human rights advocacy, legal aid and litigation.
                                                                                                        
According to the information received, on June
3, 2016, the Ministry of Home Affairs suspended the Foreign Contribution
Regulation Act (FCRA) registration of LC. In addition, the Ministry of Home
Affairs leaked the suspension notice to the press before LC received a copy of
it. This suspension of the FCRA’s registration is based on the allegations that
LC, in particular Ms. Jaising and Mr. Grover, violated the FCRA
regulations. 
These allegations include as violations of the
FCRA regulations: a) the remunerations paid by LC to Ms. Jaising for services
provided by her while she was also serving as a government servant (as the
Additional Solicitor General of India); b) the reimbursement of expenses for
telephone and internet incurred by Mr. Grover while he was serving as the UN
Special Rapporteur on the Right to Health; c) and that LC has used funds it has
received through the FCRA to organise dharnas[1] and rallies.
Lawyers Collective has denied all the aforementioned allegations.
The
Observatory fears that this harassment against LC, Ms. Jaising and Mr. Grover
is a consequence of their human rights work as legal representatives within the
framework of some specific cases, such as the legal challenge of the discharge
of Mr. Amit Shah (the BJP National President)[2],
the representation of Ms. Priya Pillai, who criticised the Central Government’s
actions[3],
as well as the representation of Mr. Yakub Memon, who challenged his death
sentence before the Supreme Court. 
The
Observatory expresses its deepest concern for the harassment and restriction to
freedom
of association and access to funding suffered by LC, and calls upon the Indian
authorities to
immediately and unconditionally lift the suspension of LC’s registration, in
order to allow such prominent organisation to carry out its legitimate human
rights work.

Actions Requested: 
Please write to the authorities in India, urging them to:
i.          
Lift immediately and unconditionally
the suspension of Lawyers Collective’s registration, as it only seems to be
aimed at sanctioning its legitimate human rights activities;
ii.         
Put an end to all acts of harassment
- including at the judicial level - against Lawyers Collective and Ms. Indira Jaising and Mr.
Anand Grover, as well as against all human rights defenders in
India so that they are able to carry out their work without hindrances;
iii.       
Conform with the provisions of the UN
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the
United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially: 
-      Article
1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association
with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of
human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international
levels”; and
-      Article
12.2, which provides that “"the State shall take all necessary measures to
ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually
and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights
referred to in the present Declaration”; and
iv.        
More generally, ensure in all
circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with
international and regional human rights instruments ratified by India.

Addresses: 


·        
Mr. Shri Nanredra Damodardas Modi, Prime Minister of India, Prime Minister’s Office, Room number 152,
South Block, New Delhi, India. Fax: + 91 11 2301 6857. E-mail: pmosb@pmo.nic.in / manmo@sansad.in
·        
Mr. Raj Nath Singh, Union Minister
of Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, 104-107 North Block, New
Delhi 110 001 India, Fax: +91 11 2309 2979. Email: dirfcra-mha@gov.in
·        
Justice Rajendra Mal Lodha, Chief Justice of India, Supreme Court, Tilak Marg, New Delhi
-1, India. Fax: +91 11 233 83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.in
·           Justice K. G. Balakrishnan,
Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission of India, Manav Adhikar Bhawan Block-C, GPO Complex,
INA, New Delhi - 110023, India. Fax +91 11 2465 1329. Email: covdnhrc@nic.in; ionhrc@nic.in
·        
Mr. A. K. Parashar, Focal Point on Human Rights Defenders, National
Human Rights Commission, Faridkot House, Copernicus Marg, New Delhi 110 001,
India. Email: hrd-nhrc@nic.in
·        
H.E. Mr. Dilip Sinha, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of India to the
United Nations (Geneva), Rue du Valais 9, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22
906 86 96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
·        
Embassy of India in Brussels, 217 Chaussée de
Vleurgat, 1050 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 6489638 / +32 2 6451869
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of India in your respective
country.



[1]           A form of peaceful
demonstration, consisting in sitting and fasting at the doorstep of an offender
until death or the demand is granted.


[2]                Mr. Amit Shah was
an accused in a case known as the « fake encounter case ». This case
is associated with the killing of
Sohrabuddin Sheikh, his wife Kausar Bi and Tulsiram Prajapati in Gujarat.


[3]           Ms. Pillai is a Greenpeace activist who was stopped at the
Delhi airport from boarding a flight to London where she was planning to attend
a conference on land rights violations criticising Government's
policies on allowing corporations to acquire and mine lands belonging to
farmers and others in
the Manhan Coal place area of the Indian state, Madhya Pradesh. 