Egypt:  New assembly law legitimizes police crackdown on peaceful protests
November 29, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2013 / NovemberEgypt: New assembly law legitimizes police crackdown on peaceful protestsPress Release3 pages / 98 KB
Egypt:
New assembly law legitimizes police crackdown on peaceful protests 
Paris, Cairo, Geneva November 29, 2013 - The days following the adoption
of the restrictive new Law on the Right to Public Meetings, Processions and
Peaceful Demonstrations on November 24th, have seen the multiplication of
arrests and detentions of peaceful protesters. FIDH and The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) denounce the
provisions of this law and fears that its implementation will lead to increased
repression by the police and judicial authorities in view to silence any
dissenting voice. FIDH and OMCT call for its immediate amendment in conformity
with international human rights standards. 
"The
right to peaceful protest is one of the main gains of the 25 January
Revolution. Restricting this fundamental right is a major set-back. The
Egyptian authorities should immediately amend the current law on assembly, so
that it is in line with international human rights standards set forth by the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)” declared
Karim Lahidji, FIDH President. 
FIDH and OMCT is
extremely concerned by the condemnation of 21 young female protesters to very
harsh jail sentence for marching on the Corniche of Alexandria holding balloons
and banners, in support of deposed President Morsy and against the Military. On
November 27th, 14 of them were sentenced by the Sidi Gaber Misdemeanor Court to
11 years and one month imprisonment, seven minors are being sent to a juvenile
delinquency center until they reach the legal age (21 years old) and six others
were sentenced in absentia to 15 years for incitement.[1] The protesters had been arrested by security
forces on October 31st and charged with “joining a banned group that works on
disabling the provisions of the law; promoting the mentioned group through
writing and speech, possession of printed materials; assembling; threatening to
use violence; disrupting the traffic and destroying public property.”[2] 
Not only the
adoption of the new law which restricts the right to peaceful assembly seems to
support the security apparatus in its crackdown over the past months and again
recently, on the Muslim Brotherhood supporters but it gives them discretion to
repress broader groups of activists, including human rights groups. 
On
Tuesday November 26, 2013 at
least nine members of the “No to Military Trials for Civilians” group, nine
journalists and seven lawyers were arrested by police forces in Cairo, as they
were demonstrating near Tahrir Square. In an effort to
pressure the members of the Constitutional Committee to vote against article
198 of the draft constitution which allows for civilians to be tried before
military courts, the “No to Military Trials for Civilians” group had called for
protests to be held on November 26th, ahead of the vote, in front of the Shura
Council (where the committee holds its meetings). Tens of protesters joined the
call at 4pm on Kasr Al Aini street, however thirty minutes later, security
forces issued a warning to the protesters to immediately end their protest,
which according to information gathered by FIDH, remained peaceful. The
protesters refused to leave and security forces opened water canons against
them. Security forces and police men in plain cloth simultaneously arrested
protesters and journalists. Video footage circulating on-line, and
authenticated, show the police beating the protesters and sexually harassing
both men and women.[3]
The total number
of arrests reached 79 persons, including 19 females. The protesters were first
detained inside the Shura Council, then they were separated and transferred to
different police stations.  A police
officer told the female protesters that they should be released, however when
they refused to leave without their male counterparts, they were dragged into a
police van and taken to the East Upper Egypt desert road where they were
dropped off in the middle of the desert. Mona Seif and Rasha Azab, two of the
female protesters who were detained and later released, said they were
subjected to beatings and insults during their detention.[4]  Some of the female protesters filed a
complaint on November 27th at the Public Prosecution against their assault by
security forces during their arrest. The Prosecution took their testimonies,
however at the time of writing, no information is available about any charges
issued by the Prosecution. In addition, some of the male protesters were later
released, however 25 currently remain in detention in New Cairo 1 police
station. On November 27th, they were presented to the Public Prosecution for
investigations, who ordered their detention for four days on charges of illegal
gathering, assaulting public employees, thuggery, organizing a protest without
notification, road block, stealing a police's intercom, and possession of
non-firearm weapons. The Front Defence of Egyptian Protesters filed today a
complaint at the Public Prosecution against the Minister of Interior, the head
of Kasr El Nile prison, and the head of the Kasr El Nile Prosecution stating
that the detainees were moved to an unknown location, without the notification
of the lawyers or their families.[5] 
FIDH and OMCT
consider the detention of these protesters to be arbitrary, as they are
detained for exercising their fundamental right to peaceful assembly.
Accordingly, FIDH and OMCT call for their immediate and unconditional
release.  Furthermore, FIDH and OMCT are
highly concerned about the allegations of sexual harassment and assault by the
police against the  protesters and calls
upon the authorities to conduct independent, effective and impartial
investigations into the allegations, and bring those responsible to account. 
This protest was
the second to be dispersed after the issuance of the new law on assembly. On
Tuesday 26th as well, the “Gaber Salah 'Jika' Movement” called for a protest
starting in Talaat Harb square in downtown Cairo to commemorate the first
anniversary of the death of Gaber Salah who was killed by the police in
November 2012. The protesters started to march towards the Shura Council, to
join the other protest. Security forces then issued a warning to the protesters
to immediately disperse claiming that the protest was illegal. Four minutes
later, security forces attacked them with water canons and tear gas at the
Journalists Syndicate. Rasha Azzab, a prominent activist and member of the “No
to Military Trials to Civilians” group was arrested during that protest and
later released. She was re-arrested hours later in the second protest. 
Background:
the Law 107 of 2013 restricting the right to peaceful assembly
The new Law 107
of 2013 on the Right to Public Meetings, Processions and Peaceful
Demonstrations was passed on November 24th by President Adly Mansour. The law
requires organizers of protests to notify the police at least three days prior
to the event. It allows the Ministry to ban protests if they “receive
information that the assembly will pose a threat to peace and security”. The
vague language gives the Ministry a wide discretion to ban protests; and while
the law allows organizers to appeal this decision before a court, it does not
set forth a time frame for hearing the appeal. The law also allows for the
Ministry to forcibly disperse a protest if any of the protesters break the law,
or if the protest is no longer peaceful. 
While it stipulates that security forces should first warn the
protesters before using water cannons, tear gas and batons, respectively, it
allows the Ministry to use bird-shot pellets during the dispersal and even live
ammunition in cases of “self-defense”. Furthermore, the law also sets extremely
high penalties (10 to 30 thousand EGP) for failing to notify the Ministry about
the organization of an assembly. 
Upon the
government's completion of the draft, human rights organizations openly
criticized it for its immense restrictions on the right to peaceful assembly.[6] The
government claimed that it would take into account the comments made by civil
society organization as well as the National Human Rights Council. However,
none of their comments were taken into consideration in the final version of
the law. FIDH member organizations in Egypt condemned the issuance of the law
and explained that the “the final version of the draft law included pro forma
amendments that do not prejudice the repressive essence of the bill, and
ignored most of the recommendations made by political forces and civil society,
in spite of the release of several commentaries including proposed amendments
and recommendations for the draft law to be compatible with international
standards.”[7]
The
organisations recall that this view is shared by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay who warned in a statement published
on November 26th that the “new law regulating demonstrations in Egypt could
lead to serious breaches of the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and must
be amended.”[8]



[1]    AFTE,
http://afteegypt.org/law_unit/2013/11/27/5888-afteegypt.html


[2]    AFTE, http://afteegypt.org/academic_freedom/2013/11/01/5642-afteegypt.html


[3]    http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sXa3QtLw5uw


[4]    See Rasha Azab testimony: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PsI-aQqEctw&feature=share;
Mona Seif testimony:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HOcQn3RuHU0&feature=share


[5]    AFTE,
http://afteegypt.org/law_unit/2013/11/27/5892-afteegypt.html#


[6]    CIHRS,
http://www.cihrs.org/?p=7416&lang=en


[7]    CIHRS,
http://www.cihrs.org/?p=7591&lang=en


[8]    OHCHR, http://www.unog.ch/unog/website/news_media.nsf/%28httpNewsByYear_en%29/CBF5652C5A754901C1257C2F003DDF61?OpenDocument 