Colombia:  Colombia: extrajudicial killing and risk of torture of farmers - correction
May 28, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Colombia / 2002 / MayColombia: Colombia: extrajudicial killing and risk of torture of farmers - correctionCase COL 130502.1 Correction to Case COL 130502 Assassination in Ambulance / Witness in danger  Geneva, May 28th 2002  The International Secretariat of the OMCT requests your URGENT action on the following situation in Colombia.  New information: The International Secretariat of the OMCT would like to rectify some information concerning the Case COL 130502, as it has received new information about the events of May 4th  2002 occurred in Llanadas, in the municipality of Casabianca, Tolima.  According to this new information, on saturday May 4th 2002, a group of heavily armed men, who identified as members of the United Self-Defence groups of Colombia (AUC), Tolima-bloc, entered two farms in Llanadas, in the municipality of Casabianca, north of the department of Tolima.     The reports affirm that during the operation, armed men entered the house of the farmer Gustavo Giraldo, aged 35, firing their weapons and wounding the later, who managed to escape. Mr. Giraldo received medical attention in the health centre of Casabianca, where he arrived shortly after midnight. He was then taken to a hospital in the nearby city of Ibagué in the early hours of Sunday 5th  of  May.   According to the information received, the same paramilitary group entered the house of Oscar Ferney Medellín Duque, an 18 year old, who was seriously wounded as a result of shots in the face and in the stomach. He received medical attention in the hospital of Casabianca. It was him, and not Mr. Giraldo’s brother, who was taken in an ambulance to the hospital Federico Lleras in Ibagué, on 5th May at around 5:00 a.m.  Reports on the incident establish that the ambulance took the route that leads to Palocabildo,  and while it was exiting the urban area of Casabianca, the vehicle, which was protected by the International Humanitaria Law, was stopped by armed men dressed in military clothes. After threatening the driver of the vehicle, the men broke the windows and shoot the occupants. Minutes later, they opened the back doors and shoot those who were still alive. Alexander Medellín Duque, brother of Oscar Ferney Medellín Duque, who managed to escape, was killed in the incident.   The ambulance driver was obliged to continue his usual route. The removal of the corpses took place in Palocabildo. According to the information, Mr. Oscar Ferney Medellín asked for help to the Casabianca police, who took him to the town’s health centre in order to receive medical attention. Later he was taken to a hospital in the city of Ibagué. His life is currently in danger, as he was witness to the killing of his brother Mr. Alexander Medellín.  The reports add that regular military controls, organized by the Patriotas Battalion, member of the Sixth Brigade whose headquarters are in Ibagué, take place in the spot where the ambulance was ambushed.  The International Secretariat of the OMCT informs that it was Mr. Alexander Medellín Duque who was assassinated by paramilitaries on May 5th 2002. The Secretariat shares the concerns of the human rights organizations for the security and physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Gustavo Giraldo and Mr. Oscar Ferney Medellín, as well as of all the members of their families.   Reminder of the situation:  The International  Secretariat of the OMCT was informed that a witness’ life was in danger. The witness was present during the assassination of his brother, who was being transported in an ambulance before he was killed. According to the reports received , on May 4th 2002, at around 7 p.m. members of the United Self-Defence Groups of Colombia, Tolima-Bloc, entered the property of the farmer Gustavo Giraldo,  located in Llanas, Casabianca municipality, north of the department of Tolima.   During the housebreaking, men entered the farmer’s house and fired their weapons. Mr. Giraldo was wounded in the incident, but he managed to escape and received medical attention in the centre of assistance located nearby. The doctors decided to transfer him in an ambulance to the city of Ibagué; he was accompanied by his mother and brother.  The ambulance was ambushed by the paramilitary group on the route that links Casabianca with Palo Cabildo. The armed men gave orders to the driver to open the back door of the vehicle. They then proceeded to kill Mr. Giraldo’s brother. Once more, Mr. Giraldo managed to escape, running amidst the shots. It is claimed, that Mr. Giraldo is still in the region, without protection or any guarantees for his life.   The OMCT therefore wishes to clarify that Mr. Alexander Medellín Duque lost his life as a result of the paramilitary actions, rather than Mr. Giraldo as stated in the previous appeal.  Action requested: Please write to the Colombian authorities urging them to:  i.	take all the necessary measures to ensure the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Gustavo Giraldo and Mr. Oscar Ferney Medellín Duque, and that of their families;  ii.	set up a high level commission in order to check the situation of the families who live in this region and whose fundamental rights are vulnerable to violations. Likewise, the commission should see for Mr. Giraldo and Mr. Medellín Duque’s life and that of the other members of their families;   iii.	develop the necessary programmes to dismantle the paramilitary groups that act in the region, specifically, the AUC Tolima-bloc, who has established a centre of operations  in Delicias, in the municipality of Lérida;  iv.	guarantee the respect for human rights and the fundamental liberties in conformity with the national laws and the international norms on human rights ratified by the Colombian government.  Addresses:  ·	S.E.  Andrés Pastrana Arango, Presidente de la República, Carrera 8 n°. 7-26, Palacio de Nariño, Santa Fe de Bogotá. Fax:  (+57 1) 286 74 34; (+57 1) 286 68 42; (+57 1) 284 21 86 e-mail : apastra@presidencia.gov.co ·	Consejería Presidencial de Derechos Humanos,  Calle 7 n°. 6-54 Piso 3, Santa Fe de Bogotá, D. C.  Fax: (+57 1) 337 13 51 ·	Dr.   Gustavo Bell Lemus, Ministro de la Defensa,  Ministerio de Defensa Nacional, Avenida El Dorado con carrera 52 CAN, Bogotá.  Fax:  (+57 1) 222 18 74 e-mail :  siden@mindefensa.gov.co ; infprotocol@mindefensa.gov.co ; mdn@cable.net.co ·	Dr.  Armando Estrada Villa, Ministro del Interior,  Ministerio del Interior, Cra. 8 n°. 8-09 SantaFe de Bogotá, Palacio de Nariño. Santa Fe de Bogotá. Fax:  (+57 1) 286 80 25 e-mail : mininterior@myrealbox.com ; minisint@col1.telecom.com.co  ·	Dr. Edgardo José Maya Villazón , Procurador General de la Nación, Carrera 5 n°. 15-80, Santa Fe de Bogotá.  Fax:  (+57 1) 342 97 23;  (+57 1) 281 75 31 e-mail : anticorrupcion@presidencia.gov.co ·	Dr.   Luis Camilo Osorio,  Fiscal General de la Nación, Diagonal 22 B n°. 52-01, Santa Fe de Bogotá.  Fax:  (+57 1) 570 20 22. e-mail: contacto@fiscalia.gov.co ;  denuncie@fiscalia.gov.co ·	Dr.   Eduardo Cifuentes, Defensor del Pueblo, Defensoría del Pueblo, Calle 55 n°. 10-32 Santa Fe de Bogotá.  Fax:  (+57 1) 346 12 25 e-mail : secretaria_privada@hotmail.com ·	General  Fernando Tapias Stahelin, Comandante de las Fuerzas Militares,  Avenida el Dorado, Cra. 52, Santa Fe de Bogotá.  Fax:  (+57 1) 222 29 35. e-mail : siden@mindefensa.gov.co ;  pilaque@cgm.mil.co ·	Representaciones Diplomáticas de Colombia en sus respectivos países  Please also write to the diplomatic representatives of Colombia in your country.  Geneva, May 28th 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 