Cameroon:  Release of Mr. Tanto Simon
July  9, 2007
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Cameroon / 2007 / JulyCameroon: Release of Mr. Tanto SimonCase CMR 080307.2  Follow-up of case CMR 080307 and case CMR 080307.1 Acquittal/ Release  Geneva, 9 July 2007  The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) has received new information about the following situation in Cameroon.   New Information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Association for the Reconstruction and Development of the Moko-Oh Peoples Cameroon (AFTRADEMOP), a member of the SOS-Torture network, and a reliable source of the acquittal and release on 27 April 2007 of Mr. Tanto Simon, National Auditor and National Information Bureau Member of the Southern Cameroons National Council (SCNC).  Reminder of the situation  OMCT had been informed about the arbitrary arrest and detention of Mr. Nfor Ngala Nfor, and of 11 others members of the SCNC, including Mr. Tanto Simon, on 20 January 2007 in Bamenda.   The details of the 11 members of the SCNC are as follows:  Mr. Mbinglo H. Humphrey, Northern Zone Chairman, residence in Bamenda Mr. Tanto Simon, National Auditor and National Information Bureau Member, residence in Bamenda Mr. Stephen Kongnso, County Chair, Bui, residence in Kumbo Mr. Henry Lamnyam, County Secretary, Donga Mantung, residence in Ndu  Mr. Achu Njei David, Organising Secretary, Mezam County, residence in Santa Mr. Nguemo Clement, Financial Secretary, Santa LGA, residence in Santa Mr. Lucas Che Ngwa, Activist, residence in Bafut Mr. Dzeni Augustine Shiyntum, Activist, residence in Kumbo Mr. Mongo Steven, Activist, residence in Bamenda Mrs. Mbi Ann-Rita Eyong, Vice Chair, Kumba LGA, residence in Kumba Mr. Ngiewih Asunkwan, National Communication Officer (he was released on 6 March 2007), residence in Bameda  According to the information received, Mr. Nfor Ngala Nfor and the above 11 representatives were arrested, along with other members of SCNC (non-identified), during a press conference held within the premises of the SCNC office in Bamenda on 20 January 2007 by security forces without any warrant of arrest. After the opening of the press conference, the premises were raided by security forces of the Gendarmerie and Divisional Officers from the Mezam region who reportedly used excessive force, resulting in a large number of injuries.   Members of the SCNC had assembled civilian and journalists for a press conference to inform of Mr. Nfor’s recent efforts to bring international attention to their situation. The SCNC advocates for increased autonomy for Cameroon's English-speaking minority.    After some of the arrested members were released for various reasons, 12 of them, including Mr. Nfor Ngala Nfor, were transferred on 22 January 2007 to the Bamenda Central Prison. While Mr. Ngiewih Asunkwan was released on 6 March 2007, the others remained in detention.  According to the information received, while bail was granted on 13 March 2007, Mr. Nfor Ngala Nfor and nine remaining other members were only released from Bamenda Central Prison at 2:00pm on 14 March 2007 as the judge who presided the hearing allegedly left the Court without signing the official order to issue bail. Their hearing on the preliminary investigation regarding the holding charge of “secessionist activities” had been adjourned on 17 April 2007. Nevertheless, according to the same information, Mr. Tanto Simon, arrested along with the others, was kept in detention as he had not been granted bail. After several hearings, it was adjourned to 27 April 2007 before the Bamenda High Court. He had remained in detention at the Bamenda Central Prison, allegedly in bad conditions and without access to medical care.   Remarks  OMCT wishes to thank all of the individuals and organizations that have taking action as a response to the urgent appeal. No further action is currently required on your part concerning this case.   *** Geneva, 9 July 2007 