Cambodia:  One year later, still no justice for environmental activist Chut Wutty!
April 26, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2013 / AprilCambodia: One year later, still no justice for environmental activist Chut Wutty!

Geneva-Paris, April 26, 2013. One year
after
the extrajudicial killing
of prominent environmental and anti-logging activist Mr. Chut Wutty, the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), in the framework of
the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, express their
deep concern about the lack of significant progress in the investigation into his
murder.
 
On April 26, 2012, while accompanying two journalists to investigate
alleged illegal logging and land grabs in Koh Kong province, Mr. Chut Wutty,
Founder of the National Resources Protection Group (NRPG) in Mondol Seima district,
Koh Kong province, was fatally shot in the leg and stomach as he tried
to start his car, following a heated stand-off with military police and
representatives of logging company Timber Green. The alleged shooter, Mr. In
Rattana, a military police officer, was also
found shot dead at the scene.
 
On October 4, 2012,
Koh Kong Provincial Court declared the case closed after concluding that Mr.
Chut Wutty was killed by Mr. In Rattana, who was in turn fatally shot by a logging
company’s security guard.
 
As of today, the
circumstances of Mr. Chut Wutty’s death still remain unclear.
 
“We strongly
condemn the prevailing impunity in Mr. Chut Wutty’s murder,
and we urge the Cambodian authorities to finally establish
the full truth and bring to justice all those responsible”, said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock today. 
 
“The authorities of Cambodia should
also ensure in all
circumstances that defenders of economic,
social and cultural rights are able to work without any fear of reprisals”, added FIDH President
Souhayr Belhassen.
 
The Observatory more
generally urges the authorities of Cambodia to put an end to all acts of
harassment against human rights defenders and to conform to the United Nations
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and international human rights instruments ratified by Cambodia. 