China:  WHRDIC urges Chinese authorities to release five young feminists
April  3, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / China / 2015 / AprilChina: WHRDIC urges Chinese authorities to release five young feminists​The
 Women Human Rights Defenders International Coalition (WHRDIC), of which
 OMCT is a member, is a resource and advocacy network supporting
women human rights defenders worldwide. The Women Human Rights Defenders International Coalition (WHRDIC)
 calls on Wang Xiaohong, the Director of the Beijing Municipal Public 
Security Bureau, Chairman Xi Jinping and Premier Li Keqiang to 
immediately and unconditionally ensure the release of the five young 
women human rights defenders who were criminally detained in China after
 they planned events to protest sexual harassment on International 
Women’s Day.

	On 12 March, Wei Tingting, Wang Man, Li Tingting (aka Li Maizi) and 
Zheng Churan (aka “Da Tu”) and Wu Rongrong were criminally detained on 
suspicion of “picking quarrels and provoking troubles”, a charge often 
used in China to suppress human rights defenders. If convicted each 
could face a maximum of five years in prison.
Police also raided the Weizhiming Women’s Centre office in Hangzhou, a women’s rights NGO that Wu Rongrong founded and where Zheng Churan and Li Tingting work.
The women, who are members of China’s Women’s Rights Action Group, 
had made stickers printed with slogans saying “Stop sexual harassment, 
let us stay safe” and “Go police, go arrest those who committed sexual 
harassment!”
As of 2 April, none of their family members had received formal 
notification of their detentions except Zheng Churan, which contravenes 
article 83 of China’s Criminal Procedure Law.
The WHRDIC also urges authorities to 
provide urgent medical care to Wu Rongrong, whose medical condition is 
of grave concern. Wu Rongrong has chronic liver problems, which have 
worsened in detention. She was not provided with the medication she 
needs despite requests from her lawyer, and had to sleep on the floor in
 the detention centre. On 19 March she was sent to a hospital run by the
 Public Security Bureau after her condition deteriorated, but it is not 
known whether she is now receiving adequate treatment.
The WHRDIC believes the ongoing detention 
of these young women is not an isolated incident but part of a broader 
trend to suppress the women’s rights movements in China. In recent 
months, the authorities have cracked down on independent grassroots 
non-governmental organisations. Civil society leaders have been 
subjected to rigorous questioning about their sources of funding and 
their activities.
In China, many other women human rights defenders have paid a high 
price for their activism to defend human rights. Human rights activist 
Cao Shunli died on 14 March 2014 after being denied medical treatment 
while in detention. Today, many other women human rights defenders are 
in jail, detained, under house arrest or otherwise harassed by the 
authorities in China. We note that Han Ying, Jia Lingmin, Liu Ping and 
Su Changlan are at risk because of their activism to defend human 
rights.
The WHRDIC calls on the Chinese 
authorities to fully respect the right of all women human rights 
defenders to carry out their important work without any fear of 
intimidation, threats or attacks. If arrests of this kind persist, it 
seriously undermines China’s leadership in organising the 26 September 
2015 Global Leaders’ Conference on Gender Equality and Women’s 
Empowerment.
China must show its genuine will to implement the Beijing 
Declaration and Platform for Action at home, including by not standing 
in the way of activists who are seeking to advance women’s rights as set
 out in this important instrument. 