Sudan:  Escalating government crackdown on protesters sparks greater safety concerns
January 30, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / Sudan / 2018 / JanuarySudan: Escalating government crackdown on protesters sparks greater safety concerns  Geneva, 30 January 2018 (OMCT) – Ahead of a new protest scheduled
tomorrow, Sudanese organizations denounce the Government’s escalating crackdown
on civil society in a bid to quash civil unrest and remain in power.Authorities
are using the current social unrest and peaceful protests against rising
commodity prices as a pretext to silence political opponents, activists, human
rights defenders, journalists and students resorting to arbitrary detention and
transfer to remote Darfur prisons. The African Centre for Justice and Peace
Studies (ACJPS), trusted OMCT partner organization, reported it also fears those detained may undergo torture
and ill-treatment by the Government’s National Intelligence and Security
Service (NISS).
The NGO is
particularly concerned for the lives of the 79 people who remain disappeared after 131 activists were arrested and held incommunicado in Sudan during peaceful protests that took place between 13 and 21 January.
The NISS indeed reportedly violently
repressed the protests, using tear gas, sticks
and water hosepipes to
disperse the crowds, leading to the arrest of over 170 individuals since 11
January, including political opposition leaders, students and
human rights defenders. A student activist was killed and several others injured on 7
January 2018, after security forces attacked a secondary school in West Darfur
during a demonstration against the soaring cost of bread. A new protest is scheduled for tomorrow, 31 January, at the Al Shabia square in
Khartoum Bahrim, Sudan’s third-largest city.
“The fact that these events are going on
amidst discussion about the presidential candidate for the 2022 elections by
the ruling party indicates that the current unrest in Sudan is trivial to the
ruling party and they will do whatever it takes to remain in power,” said
ACJPS’ Human Rights Monitoring Director in the report published today.
Such police violence is not new. In 2013 some
200 people were killed for protesting against rising fuel prices . The Sudanese Government has in recent years regularly quashed protests
against the removal of subsidies on commodities as part of austerity measures aimed
at curbing spiraling inflation and boosting the economy.
The election of the country’s President,
Omar al-Bashir, to a third term in 2015 was marred by a boycott from the main
opposition parties amid corruption claims. He has had two arrest warrants
issued against him by the International
Criminal Court (ICC) since 2009 for genocide and crimes against humanity in
Darfur.
Women human rights defenders were also
among those targeted in this latest wave of repression of popular dissent. Amal Habani, coordinator of the No Oppression
Against Women Initiative in Sudan and winner of an Amnesty International award for
women human rights defenders in 2014, was arrested on 16 January and beaten with an
electric rod during interrogation. Nahid Jabrallah, Director of the Sima Centre for Training and
Protection of Women and Children's Rights, was also arrested on 19 January.
They are both still in detention.
The country, which in 2005 emerged
from a second civil war leading to the separation of the south into a separate
country, also continues to suffer violence as a result of tribes and abusive militia
groups competing for scarce resources.
The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) is
a coalition of over 200 international non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
fighting against torture, summary executions, enforced disappearances and all
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment and advocating better protection
for human rights defenders around the world.
For further information, please
contact Marta Gionco, Human Rights Officer: mgi@omct.org +41 22 809 4935, or Lori Brumat,
Head of Communications +41 22 809 49 33. 