Nepal: forced disappearances and extra-judicial executions
January 26, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2004 / JanuaryNepal: Nepal: forced disappearances and extra-judicial executionsCase NPL 260104 / NPL 260104.CC URGENT APPEAL / CHILD CONCERN Arbitrary arrests and detention / Forced disappearance / Risk of  torture / Extra-judicial execution  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT  intervention in the following situation in Nepal.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by INSEC, a  member of the OMCT network, and other reliable sources, of the forced  disappearance of eight persons and the extra-judicial execution of  three others, in Nepal.  According to the information received, the whereabouts of the  following eight persons, including two children, remain unknown since  their arrest and forced disappearance in Nepal:  ·	On January 8th, 2004, 48 year-old Dr. Birendra Jhapali, the  Director of Miteri Hospital at Kathmandu Metropolitan City-31,  Bagbazaar, was reportedly arrested at the hospital by two persons in  plain clothes claiming to be security personnel. According to his  wife, Rakhi Shreshta, who witnessed the incident, Jhapali was taken  away with information that he would be released within two hours  after he had answered some questions. His whereabouts and the cause  of arrest have not yet been disclosed.   ·	On December 28th, 2003, 16 year-old Shiva Ram Yadav, a student at  the Dahipaudi school, and a resident of Gauripur VDC-8, Siraha  district, was reportedly arrested by armed security personnel from  Gauripur-8 while he was going for tuition with his teacher  Jayapurwala. His whereabouts and cause of arrest is unknown.  ·	On December 18th, 2003, at 10.45 p.m. 35 year-old farmer Rajendra  Thapa, a resident of Likhu VDC-7 of Nuwakot district, was reportedly  arrested by a group of 5 plain clothed security personnel from his  rented room at Imadole, Lalitpur district. The Security personnel  reportedly drove him away in a Isuzu van that had a concealed number  plate. His political affiliation and reason of arrest are unknown.  Rita Thapa, the wife of the victim, who witnessed the incident, has  informed the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) and the Royal  Nepalese Army's Human Rights cell about these events. His whereabouts  and the reason for his arrest are unknown.  ·	On December 18th, 2003, at 3.30 p.m., 28 year-old farmer Suresh  Kumar Pokhrel, a resident of Jagalsahiya-6, Bara district, was  reportedly arrested by armed security personnel from Tamagadi gate,  Bara while he was traveling on Dhrubatara bus (Na.A.Kha.3922) - a  public passenger vehicle. His whereabouts and the cause of arrest is  unknown.  ·	On December 6th, 2003, at midnight, 18 year-old Prakash Panta, a  student and resident of Madanpur VDC-8, Nuwakot district, was  reportedly arrested by around a dozen plainclothes security personnel  from his rented room at Mhaimpi, Kathmandu. Shree Ram Panta and Ram  Prasad Silwal witnessed the incident. Reason of arrest and his  whereabouts are unknown. His relatives have informed the NHRC and  Human Rights cell of Royal Nepalese Army about these events.  ·	On December 1st, 2003 at 11 p.m., 16 year-old Bishawmbar Lama, a  student and resident of Lalitpur Sub-Metropolis-4, was reportedly  arrested by armed security personnel from Sundarighat, Lalitpur  district, while he was returning home. According to an eyewitness  (his friend) Niraj Lama, security personnel drove him away in a white  colored four wheeler. His relatives have reportedly submitted an  application to District Police Officer complaining about his  disappearance. His whereabouts and reason of arrest have not yet been  disclosed.   ·	On November 15th, 2003, at 10.30 a.m., 28 year-old civil servant  Sujindra Maharjan was reportedly arrested by 5 plain clothed security  personnel from his home Kirtipur Municipality-14, Kathmandu district.  His whereabouts and the reason of arrest have not yet been disclosed.    ·	At midnight on September 5th, 2003, 50 year-old farmer Gambira Shah  Kanu, who is a resident of Hathiyahi VDC-1, Rautahat district, was  reportedly arrested by armed police from his house while he was  sleeping. According to an eyewitness (his wife) Sita Devi Kanu, a  group of 5 to 7 policemen took him away naked in a car. His  whereabouts and cause of arrest is unknown.  Separately, OMCT has been informed of the extra-judicial execution of  three youths on Wednesday, January 21st, 2004 by the security forces  in Kumari VDC, located in the southern part of Nuwakot district. The  soldiers reportedly killed Yadukumar Mudbhari and Rajan Puadasaini  (24 years old) at Akashedanda of Jhyangli and shot and killed a third  youth, Maniraj Mudbhari, who was allegedly returning home after  feeding the cattle at a farm. Yadukumar Mudbhari, the father of two  young children, who worked in Mumbai and had returned home during the  Dashain festival. There are three bullet shots wound on his body,  which was found sandwiched between rocks after he was killed. Rajan  Puadasaini reportedly worked at the Metro office in New Delhi and had  come home to celebrate Maghe Sankranti, a traditional festival day.  His dead body was found mutilated, his face shattered by bullets. The  two men were related and had left their homes on Wednesday at 8 am to  visit their in-laws.  The local community claims that the three assassinated youths were  under 26 years old and had no political affiliation whatsoever,  although the security forces claim that  they were affiliated to the Maoist rebels, who are currently engaged  in armed conflict with the authorities. The site of incident lies at  20 kilometres southeast from  Ranipowa. According to eye witnesses, the soldiers involved in the  incident had reportedly forcibly taken the signatures of local  people, who were forced to agree to say  that the people that they had  killed were terrorists.   The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerning by these  reports of forced disappearances and calls upon the authorities to  immediately locate these persons'  whereabouts, guarantee their personal integrity at all times and  release them in the absence of legal charges that are in line with  international law and standards.  Concerning the case of 16 year old Shiva Ram Yadav and Bishawmbar  Lama, OMCT recalls that Nepal, as a state party to the Convention of  the Rights of the Child, is  bound by the provisions that a child shall only be deprived of  liberty "(…) as a measure of last resort and for the shortest  appropriate period of time" (Art. 37 (b)), as well as  the "guarantee to be presumed innocent until proven guilty according  to law (i) and to have the matter determined without delay by a  competent, independent and impartial  authority or judicial body in a fair hearing according to law (iii)"  (Art. 40, §2.(b)). Concerning the forced disappearance and the  reported extra-judicial executions of the three  youths, OMCT urges the authorities to immediately launch impartial  investigations, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to  justice and award adequate  reparation to the victim or their families, in the case of the  deceased.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Nepal urging them to:  i.	immediately locate the whereabouts of the eight victims of forced  disappearance ; ii.	take all measures necessary to guarantee their physical and  psychological integrity; iii.	order their immediate release in the absence of legal charges  that are consistent with international law and standards, or, if such  charges exist, bring them before  an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural  rights at all times; iv.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the  circumstances of these events, notably the forced disappearances and  extra-judicial executions, in order to  identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal  and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; v.	guarantee that adequate reparation is provided to the victims of  these abuses, or their families; vi.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental  freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and  international human rights  standards.  Addresses  ·	Prime Minister Surya Bahadur Thapa, Prime Minister's Office, Singha  Durbar, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax:+ 977 1 4 227 286  ·	General Pyar Jung Thapa, Chief of Army Staff (COAS), Army  Headquarters, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax + 977 1 4 242 168 ·	Brigadier General B A K Sharma, Head, Army Human Rights Cell, Army  Headquarters, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: + 977 1 4 226 292 / 229 451 ·	Ambassador, Acharya, Gyan Chandra, Permanent Mission of the Kingdom  of Nepal, 81 rue de la Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122  7332722, E-mail: mission.nepal@ties.itu.int  Please also write to the embassies of Nepal in your respective  country.  Geneva, January 26th, 2004  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this  appeal in your reply.   Organisation Mondiale Contre la Torture (OMCT) World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) Organización Mundial Contra la Tortura (OMCT) 8 rue du Vieux-Billard Case postale 21 CH-1211 Geneve 8 Suisse/Switzerland Tel. : 0041 22 809 49 39 Fax : 0041 22 809 49 29 E-mail : omct@omct.org http://www.omct.org 