Syrian Arab Republic:  Incommunicado detention of Ms. Razan Zaitouneh's husband and brother
June  3, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2011 / JuneSyrian Arab Republic: Incommunicado detention of Ms. Razan Zaitouneh's husband and brother

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
 
SYR 007 / 0611 / OBS 086
Incommunicado detention of family members / 
Fear for psychological and physical integrity / 
Harassment
Syria
June 3, 2011
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the 
following situation in Syria.
 
Description of the situation: 
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the 
incommunicado detention of the husband and brother of human rights lawyer Ms. 
Razan Zaitouneh, Messrs. Wa'el Hammada and Abd al-Rahman Hammada, since respectively 
May 12 and April 30, 2011.
 
According to the information received, Ms. Razan Zaitouneh and her 
husband have been in hiding since April 2011, as the authorities are pursuing 
human rights and pro-democracy activists, including Ms. Zaitouneh, in the 
context of the repression of the social protest movement that started in March 
2011.
 
On April 30, 2011, security agents arrested Mr. Abd al-Rahman Hammada 
while he was getting some clothes at the couple's flat. The security agents 
tried to organise a trap to arrest Mr. Wa'el Hammada but failed. On May 12, Mr. 
Wa'el Hammada was eventually arrested at his workplace.
 
Since then, the two men have been held incommunicado at an unknown 
location. The Syrian security forces would reportedly continue their 
investigation to locate Ms. Razan Zaitouneh.
 
The Observatory fears that Messrs. Wa'el Hammada and Abd al-Rahman 
Hammada are kept in a secret location in order to force Ms. Razan Zaitouneh to surrender. The Observatory is deeply concerned by Messrs. Wa'el Hammada and Abd 
al-Rahman Hammada's incommunicado detention, which seem to merely aim at sanctioning Ms. Razan Zaitouneh's human rights activities, and fears for their physical and psychological integrity amid the routine acts of violence, including torture and ill-treatment, 
committed against those who are considered to support the social protest 
movement.
 
The Observatory therefore calls upon the Syrian authorities to take 
prompt action in order to disclose Messrs. Wa'el Hammada and Abd al-Rahman 
Hammada’s whereabouts and release them immediately. The Observatory further calls upon the Syrian authorities to stop the 
systematic repression of all human rights defenders in the 
country.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the Syrian authorities, urging them to: 
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological 
integrity of Ms. Razan Zaitouneh and Messrs. Wa'el Hammada and Abd al-Rahman Hammada, as well as of all 
human rights defenders in Syria;
 
ii. Take prompt action in order to disclose the whereabouts of 
Messrs. Wa'el Hammada and Abd al-Rahman Hammada and immediate and unconditionally release them, as it seems to 
merely aim at sanctioning Ms. Razan Zaitouneh's human rights 
activities;
 
iii. Put an end to any acts of harassment and intimidation against all 
human rights defenders in Syria; 
 
iv. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 
1998, especially: 
-     its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the 
protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the 
national and international levels”;
-      its Article 6 (b) and (c), which states that “everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others […] as provided for in human rights 
and other applicable international instruments, freely to publish, impart or 
disseminate to others views, information and knowledge on all human rights and 
fundamental freedoms and [...] to study, discuss, form and hold opinions on the 
observance, both in law and in practice, of all human rights and fundamental 
freedoms and, through these and other appropriate means, to draw public 
attention to those matters”;
-     and its Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all 
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of 
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, 
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or 
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of 
the rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 
v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental 
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and 
international instruments ratified by the Syrian Arab Republic. 
 
Addresses: 
 
· President, His Excellency Bashar al-Assad, Presidential Palace, al 
Rashid Street, Damascus, Syria Arab Republic, Fax: +963 11 332 3410
· Minister of Defence, His Excellency General, Ali Habib Mahmud, 
Ministry of Defence, O mayyad Square, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, Fax: +963 
11 223 7842 
· Minister of Justice, His Excellency Mr. Tayzeer Qala Awwad, Ministry 
of Justice, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, Fax: +963 11 666 2460 
· Minister of Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Wallid Mu’allim, 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, al-Rashid Street, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, 
Fax: +963 11 332 7620 
· Ambassador Bashar Ja'afari, Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic to UN in Geneva, 72 
rue de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 42 75, Email: 
mission.syria@ties.itu.int 
· Embassy of the Syrian Arab Republic in Brussels, 1 avenue F.D. 
Roosevelt, 1050 Brussels, Belgium, Tel: +32 2 554 19 22; Fax: +32 2 648 14 85 

 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the Syrian 
Arabic Republic in your respective country. 
 
*** 
Paris-Geneva, June 3, 2011 
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this 
appeal in your reply.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.orgTel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 
29 