Azerbaijan:  Ongoing judicial harassment against Mr. Rasul Jafarov
January 29, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2015 / JanuaryAzerbaijan: Ongoing judicial harassment against Mr. Rasul Jafarov New
information
AZE 001 / 0115 / OBS 001.1
Judicial harassment / Arbitrary
detention
Azerbaijan
January 29,
2015
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Azerbaijan.
 
New
information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing
judicial harassment against Mr. Rasul
Jafarov, who actively participated in the “Sing for Democracy” and the
"Art of Democracy” movement ahead of the Eurovision song contest in Baku
in May 2012, and who was planning a campaign called “Sports for Human Rights”
prior to the European Games which will take place in Baku in June 2015. Mr.
Jafarov is also the Head of the “Human Rights Club”, established in December
2010. Despite repeated attempts to register his NGO with the Azerbaijani government,
registration was refused several times by the authorities. Mr. Jafarov was
arrested on August 2, on charges of illegal entrepreneurship (Article 192 of
the Criminal Code), tax evasion (Article 213) and abuse of office (Article
308). His detention term was extended by three months on October 23. On
December 12, additional charges were brought against him under Articles 179.3.2
(embezzlement allegedly causing damage to third parties identified as “victims”
by the investigative body) and 313 (service forgery). If convicted, he could be
sentenced to up to 12 years’ imprisonment.
 
On January 27, 2014, the first hearing on merits took place at the Baku
Grave Crimes Court, which was monitored by the Observatory in the framework of
an international trial observation mission.
 
At the beginning of the hearing, three out of four individuals whom the
investigative body had unilaterally recognised as “victims” of alleged
embezzlement by Mr. Rasul Jafarov (see background information) stated they had
actually no complaints against the latter, and asked the court to dismiss their
“victim” status. Other individuals had made similar requests at the previous
hearing on January 15. Lawyer Fariz Namazly subsequently requested the court to
remove the “victim” status of all the individuals concerned, as they had not
suffered any damage by Mr. Jafarov. This request was however dismissed by the
judge.
 
In addition, at the same hearing, lawyer Fariz Namazli addressed five
petitions to the court, most of which had already been formulated during the
preliminary hearing (see background information).
 
In his first petition, he requested the court to let the defendant seat
beside his lawyers during court sessions.
 
In his second petition, he requested a microphone to be installed in the
room, so the audience could hear the parties' arguments clearly, in line with
the principle of transparency of debates.
 
In his third petition, he asked that the detention of Mr. Jafarov be
commuted into house arrest, arguing that since the preliminary investigation is
over, there is no risk that Mr. Jafarov may hide from the investigation, try to
influence criminal proceedings or try to falsify evidence. To support this
claim, Mr. Namazli added that the conditions and length of Mr. Jafarov's
transfer from the detention centre to the court are usually tiresome, thus
affecting his ability to fully defend himself once in the courtroom, in
violation of Article 6 of the European Convention of Human Rights.
 
In his fourth petition, lawyer Fariz Namazli requested the court to drop
the case and accusations against Mr. Jafarov, arguing in particular that the
latter has always signed grant agreements with donors as a natural person to
carry out his human rights activities, using his accounts only as an individual,
and not within a legal entity.
 
In his fifth petition, Mr. Namazli finally requested the court to
exclude from the case file an audit on Mr. Jafarov’s accounts signed by
representatives of the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Taxes and the
Council on State Support to NGOs, since these bodies do not have authority to
investigate the activities of an individual.
 
While the state prosecutor opposed all the applications, the court
rejected four of them, and only granted a minor one allowing Mr. Jafarov to sit
next to his lawyers.
 
The prosecutor then read the indictment, describing the use of grants by
Mr. Jafarov as "illegal business and appropriation". The
investigation body alleges that Mr. Jafarov is responsible for a
misappropriation of 150,636 manat, and for tax evasion amounting to 6,257 manat
(around the same amount in euros).
 
Mr. Jafarov pleaded not guilty, declared that the charges were unclear,
and asked the court to clarify the accusations of “abuse of office” and
“forgery”. These requests were all dismissed by the judge.
 
The next hearing was adjourned to February 10, 2015.
 
The Observatory deplores the above-mentioned violations of the right to
a fair trial, to the presumption of innocence and to the equality of arms, and
calls upon the Azeri authorities to release Mr. Jafarov immediately since his
detention is arbitrary as it only aims at sanctioning his human rights
activities, and more generally to put an end to any
kind of harassment - including at the judicial level – against him and all human
rights defenders in Azerbaijan.
 
Background information:
 
On January 15, 2014, a preparatory hearing was held at the Baku Grave
Crimes Court, where Mr. Rasul Jafarov was put in a double iron cage. Contesting
the charges against his client, lawyer Fariz Namazli stated that in the
framework of his human rights activities, Mr. Rasul Jafarov had always signed
grant agreements with donors as a natural person, that his accounts were used
only in the framework of an individual entrepreneurship, and that he never used
any attributes of a legal entity. To that end, Mr. Namazli requested the
exclusion from the case file of an audit on Mr. Jafarov’s accounts signed by
representatives of the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Taxes and the
Council on State Support to NGOs, since these bodies do not have authority to
investigate the activities of an individual.
 
In addition, at the same hearing, individuals whom the investigative
body recognised as “victims” of alleged embezzlement in the present case stated
they had actually no complaints against Mr. Rasul Jafarov, and asked the court
to release him.
 
Accordingly, Mr. Namazli filed petitions to terminate the criminal case
against his client, to commute Mr. Jafarov’s measure of imprisonment into house
arrest, to audiotape or videotape all the hearings, to let the defendant seat
beside his lawyers during court sessions, and to include additional documents
in the case file as evidence proving the groundlessness of the charges. As the
Prosecutor asked the judge reject all these petitions, the court only accepted
the petition to include additional elements of the defence in the case file,
and rejected all others claims of the defendant.
 
 
 
The trial against Mr. Rasul Jafarov is taking
place amidst a wave of ever increasing repression against civil society
organisations and representatives in Azerbaijan. This trial is taking
place in parallel to that of Mr. Intigam
Aliyev, a human rights lawyer who has represented more than 100 victims
before the European Court of Human Rights. These two trials are the first in a long series intended to silence human
rights defenders. Other defenders currently in pre-trial
detention include Ms. Leyla Yunus, Mr. Arif Yunusov, and Ms.
Khadija Ismailova[1].
 
The Observatory also recalls that in May
2014, two leaders of the Election Monitoring and Democracy Studies Centre
(EMDSC), Messrs. Anar Mammadli and Bashir Suleymanli, were
sentenced to 5,5 and 3,5 years' imprisonment under accusations of “illegal
entrepreneurship”. In addition,  Talysh
defender Hilal Mammadov continues to serve five years in prison
following unfair proceedings lodged on the basis of spurious criminal offences.
 
Action requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities in Azerbaijan, urging them to:
 
i.       
Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Rasul Jafarov and
all human rights defenders in Azerbaijan;
 
ii.      Ensure the right to a fair trial, to the presumption of
innocence and to the equality of arms is fully respected during all trials
against human rights defenders in Azerbaijan.
iii.      
 
iv.     Immediately release Mr. Rasul Jafarov, as well as all the other arbitrarily detained human
rights defenders, since their detentions are arbitrary and only aim at
sanctioning their human rights activities; 
 
v.       Put an end to any kind of harassment - including at the judicial level -
against Mr. Rasul Jafarov, and more generally against all human rights
defenders in Azerbaijan;
 
vi.     Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9,
1998, especially:
-       
Article 1, which states
that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-       
Article 5, which
underscores the right of every individual to form, join, and participate in
non-governmental organizations; and
-       
Article 12.2, which
provides that the State shall “take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of his or her rights”; 
 
vii.    Amend the domestic NGO legislation and grant legislation, and bring them
in compliance with the opinion 787/2014 of the European Commission for
Democracy through Law (Venice Commission), adopted on December 15, 2014;
 
viii.  Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Azerbaijan.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
Mr. Ilham Aliyev, President of the Republic of
Azerbaijan, Office of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, 19
Istiqlaliyyat St., Baku AZ1066, Azerbaijan, Fax: (+994) 12 492 06 25, (+994)
412 92 28 68, E-mail: office@pa.gov.az, office@apparat.gov.az
·    
Mr. Zakir Garalov, Prosecutor
General of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Prosecutor’s Office, 7 Nigar Rafibeyli
St., Baku, Azerbaijan, Fax: (+994) 12 492 06 82, (+994) 12 492 26 63, E-mail:
z.qaralov@prosecutor.gov.az,
info@prosecutor.gov.az 
·    
Mr. Eldar Mahmudov, Minister of
National Security, Ministry of National Security of the Republic of Azerbaijan,
Parliament Avenue 14, Baku AZ1006, Azerbaijan, Fax: (+994) 12
493-76-22, E-mail: cpr@mns.gov.az
·     Mr. Ramil Usubov, Minister of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Internal
Affairs of the Azerbaijani Republic, Fax: (+994) 12 492 45 90
·    
Mr. Elmar Mammadyarov, Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Azerbaijan, E-mail: katiblik@mfa.gov.az
·    
Mr. Fikrat F. Mammadov,
Minister of Justice in
Azerbaijan, Inshaatchilar Prospekti, 1 Baku, Azerbaijan, e-mail: contact@justice.gov.az; Fax (+994) 12 430
09 81
·    
H.E. Mr. Murad N. Najafbayli,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Azerbaijan to the United Nations in Geneva, Route des Fayards 237, CH-1290 Versoix, Switzerland, Fax: (+41) 22 901 18
44, E-mail: geneva@mission.mfa.gov.az
·    
Embassy of Azerbaijan in Brussels, Avenue Moliere 464,
1050 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: (+32) 2 345 91 85
 
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or
embassies of Azerbaijan in your respective country as well as to the EU diplomatic missions
or embassies in Azerbaijan.
 



[1]    The pre-trial detention of Ms. Khadija
Ismailova, which was due to expire on February 5, was prolonged for two
additional months on January 27 by the Sabayil District Court of Baku. 