Syrian Arab Republic:  32 family members of human rights defenders and prisoners of conscience charged
March 18, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2011 / MarchSyrian Arab Republic: 32 family members of human rights defenders and prisoners of conscience chargedFamilies of Syrian defenders charged3 pages / 104 KB

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

SYR
003 / 0311 / OBS 037.1
Release
Arbitrary detention / Judicial harassment
Syria
March 18, 2011
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Syria.
New information: 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the release
of several family members of human rights defenders and prisoners of conscience
as well as of a court order to maintain in detention 32 others who have been
charged after a peaceful gathering held before the Ministry of Interior to call
for the release of their relatives and all prisoners of conscience in Syria[1].
According to the information received, on March 17, 2011, 32 family
members of human rights defenders and prisoners of conscience were interrogated
and charged by the first investigating judge of Damascus for violating Article
285 of the Criminal Code which criminalises “allegations that weaken national
sentiment or incite racial or sectarian strife made during times of war or in
anticipation of war” by three to 15 years’ imprisonment and Article 307 which
punishes “deeds committed, writings composed, or speeches held with the
intention of inciting sectarian or racial strife or provoking conflict between
the religions and the various members of the nation” by six months and two
years of prison. All of the accused denied having committed the offences.
The 32 individuals are Omar
Al-Labwani, Riba Al-Labwani, Laila Al-Labwani, Ammar
Al-Labwani, Siba Hafiz Hassan, human rights defender Sereen
Khouri, Nahid Badawieh, Naret Ibrahim Abdul Karim, Badr
Eddin Al-Shallash, Kamal Shaikho, member of the Committee for the Defence of Democratic Liberties and Human
Rights in Syria (CDF), Suhair Al-Attassi,
President of the Attassi Forum, a pro-democracy discussion group, Mohamed
Osama Nassar, Saad Jawdat Saeed, Bisher Jawdat Saeed, Ghaffar
Hikmat Muhammad, Dana Ibrahim Al-Jawabra, Wafa Mohamed Al-Lahham,
Nabil Walid Shurbaji, Fahima (Herveen) Saleh Awsi, a member of
the Kurdish Committee for Human Rights (Monitor), Rayan Kamal Suleyman,
Dia Eldin Doghmosh, Nasr Eddin Fakhr Eddin Ahmi, Zokan Nofal,
Ali Abdul Rahman Al-Muqdad, Shaher Al-Warea', Hisham Khalid
Al-Droubi, Mohammad Hassan Al-Khalil, Nisreen Khalid Hasan, Adel
Al-Bunni, Fahed Al-Bassam Al-Yimani, Abdul Al-Razzaq Al-Temmo,
Mudar Al-Asimi.
The investigating judge also ordered the release of Nawras Al-Shaer
Radi.
As of issuing this urgent appeal, all the individuals mentioned above
remain detained in the Damascus Central Prison of Adra or Douma Prison for
Women. The 32 individuals announced that they would join the hunger strike
started by a group of 12 including human rights defenders and prisoners of
conscience on March 7, 2011. 
Furthermore, according to the information received, Ismail Khatib,
Mazen Darwish, Director of the Syrian Centre for Media and Freedom of
Expression (SCM), Tayeb Tizini, Maimouna Alammar, Ammar Dawood,
Ricardo Dawood, Yassin Al-Labwani, Hassiba Abderrahman, also
arrested on March 16, 2011, have been released without charge.
No information has been received so far
concerning the situation of several other family members who would also have
been arrested in relation to the peaceful gathering. They include: Hussein
Al-Labwani, Hannibal Awwad, Mahmoud Ghawrani, Mohammad Adib Matar,
Mohammad Darwish, Ghaffar Hikmat Muhammad, Abdul Rahman Kheto,
Kaka Dawood, Mohammad Munir Al-Fakir, Bara Kellizin, Mohammad Al-Katib and
Wissam Tarif.
These acts illustrate once more the
extreme harassment faced by human rights defenders in Syria and the refusal of
the regime to open any dialogue with any dissenting voices. The Observatory
expresses its deepest concern about the assault and arrest of these peaceful
demonstrators, which seem to merely aim at sanctioning their human rights
activities, and particularly fears for their physical and psychological
integrity. The Observatory therefore calls upon the Syrian authorities to take
prompt action in order to immediately and unconditionally release them, and
drop the charges brought against 32 of them.
The Observatory further urges the Syrian
authorities to release all human rights
defenders currently detained in the country.
Background information:
On
March 16, 2011, dozens of family members of human rights defenders and
prisoners of conscience gathered peacefully at noon to call for the release of
their relatives and all prisoners of conscience in Syria as well as to express
disappointment that a significant number of prisoners of conscience were not covered
by the March 8 amnesty issued to mark the Baath Revolution Day. There, they
were “welcomed” by state security officers who beat them up and arrested some
of them. More than 40 of them were then arrested.
Moreover, on March 7, 2011, a group of around 12 prisoners including
human rights defenders and prisoners of conscience detained in the Damascus
central prison of Adra went on a hunger strike to demand the end of political
trials and detentions, as well as democratic reforms in the country. This group
notably included human rights defenders Messrs. Anwar Al Bunni, a lawyer and founding member of the Syrian Human Rights Association, Habib
Saleh, founder of the Tartus
branch of the National Dialogue Forum,
Ali Al-Abdallah, member of the National Council of the Damascus
Declaration for Democratic National Change (NCDD), Kamal Al-Labwani, member of CDF.
Actions requested:
Please write to the Syrian authorities, urging them to: 
i. Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of all
above-mentioned peaceful demonstrators and human rights defenders;
ii. Ensure
their immediate and unconditionally release since their detention is arbitrary
as it only aims at sanctioning their human rights activities; 
iii. Put
an end to any acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against all
human rights defenders in Syria; 
iv. Conform
with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by
the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially: 
-         
its Article 1, which states
that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-         
Article 5 (a), which states
that “for the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental
freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in association with others,
at the national and international levels: to meet or assemble peacefully”;
-         
and its Article 12.2, which
provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
present Declaration”;
v. Ensure
in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with international human rights standards and international instruments
ratified by the Syrian Arab Republic. 
Addresses: 
· President,
His Excellency Bashar al-Assad, Presidential Palace, al Rashid Street,
Damascus, Syria Arab Republic, Fax: +963 11 332 3410
· Minister
of Defence, His Excellency General, Ali Habib Mahmud, Ministry of Defence, O
mayyad Square, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, Fax: +963 11 223 7842 
· Minister
of Justice, His Excellency Mr. Ahmad Hamod Younes, Mazeh “Otstrad”, Damascus,
Syrian Arab Republic, Fax: +963 11 666 2460 
· Minister
of Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Wallid Mu’allim, Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, al-Rashid Street, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, Fax: +963 11 332
7620 
· Ambassador
Faysal Khabbaz Hamoui, Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic to UN in
Geneva, 72 rue de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 42 75,
Email: mission.syria@ties.itu.in 
· Embassy
the Syrian Arab Republic in Brussels, 1 avenue F.D. Roosevelt, 1050 Brussels,
Belgium, Tel: +32 2 554 19 22; Fax: +32 2 648 14 85 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the Syrian
Arabic Republic in your respective country. 
*** 
Paris-Geneva, March 18, 2011 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·        
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·        
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1
43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·        
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0)
22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1]               See urgent appeal SYR 003 / 0311 / OBS 037, 16 March 2011. 