Mexico:  Joint Statement WHRDIC: Justice for Bettina Cruz Velázquez
October 16, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Mexico / 2014 / OctoberMexico: Joint Statement WHRDIC: Justice for Bettina Cruz VelázquezMexico_161014_WHRDIC Statement Bettina Cruz Velazquez2 pages / 353 KBThe Women Human Rights
Defenders International Coalition is calling for justice for Bettina Cruz Velázquez who has been unfairly and
severely prosecuted as an act of reprisal for her work as a woman human rights
defender. 
Bettina Cruz Velázquez is currently going through
criminal proceedings launched by the Mexican Federal Government in 2012, with
an outcome expected in days. She is accused of having committed the crimes of: 
·      
- Unlawful deprivation of liberty; and, 
·      
- Crimes Against Consumption and National Wealth, under Articles 364 and
254 TER Section I of the Federal Penal Code, as part of a demonstration, at
which she was NOT present. 
Since the start of her
trial, she has been threatened, assaulted and arbitrarily detained by agents of
the state.
Bettina Cruz Velázquez is is an Indigenous binnizá
woman, member of the Asamblea de los Pueblos Indígenas del Istmo de Tehuantepec
en Defensa de la Tierra y el Territorio (APIITDTT - Assembly of Indigenous
Peoples of the Tehuantepec Isthmus in Defense of Land and Territory) in Oaxaca
Mexico. 
Since 2007, she has
campaigned to defend their territory against the Mareña Renewables, Gas Natural
Fenosa, Demex (Renovalia Energy), Enel and Iberdrola companies that have
attempted to grab their ejido and communal lands to install wind power
generators.
There has been a lack of
transparency in the development of the projects without the free, prior and
informed consent of the indigenous peoples on whose lands the generators were
built. Despite requests by the community for authorities to intervene, they
have remained absent and placed corporate interests ahead of human rights
obligations. 
In response to the
communities’ peaceful protests, the Mexican government has chosen to enact
reprisals against human rights defenders. The WHRDIC has grave concerns that
this is a strategy to intimidate, persecute and criminalize not only Bettina
Cruz’s work, but also the legitimate work of all human rights defenders with
the goal to put limits on advocacy work and serve as a mechanism of criminalisation
of social protest. 
The WHRDIC will monitor the
trial closely to ensure that Mexico upholds its international human rights
obligations.
 
Notes 
The Women Human Rights Defender International Coalition
is a resource and advocacy network supporting women defenders worldwide. We
have 29 members:

Amnesty International (AI)
Asia Pacific Forum on Women, Law and Development (APWLD)
Asian Forum for Human Rights and Development (FORUM ASIA)
The Association for Progressive Communications (APC)
Association for Women’s Rights in Development (AWID)
BAOBAB for Women’s Human Rights (BAOBAB)
Center for Reproductive Rights (CRR)
Center for Women’s Global Leadership (CWGL)
Coalition of African Lesbians (CAL)
Front Line Defenders
Human Rights First
Information Monitor (INFORM)
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)
International Service for Human Rights (ISHR)
International Women’s Rights Action Watch Asia Pacific
(IWRAW-AP)
Isis International
ISIS Women’s International Cross-Cultural Exchange
(ISIS-WICCE)
Just Associates (JASS)
The Latin American and Caribbean Committee for the
Defense of Women’s Rights (CLADEM)
MADRE
Nazra for Feminist Studies
Peace Brigades International
Rainbow Rights Project (R-Rights), Inc.
Urgent Action Fund for Women’s Human Rights (UAF)
Women Living under Muslim Laws (WLUML)
Women’s Global Network for Reproductive Rights
Women’s Initiatives for Gender Justice (WIGJ)
Women’s Rehabilitation Centre (WOREC)
World Organisation against Torture (OMCT) 