Egypt:  Egypt: further arrests and allegations of torture of demonstrators
April 17, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2003 / AprilEgypt: Egypt: further arrests and allegations of torture of demonstratorsCase EGY 270303.2 Follow-up of Case EGY 270303 Arbitrary detention / Ill-treatment / Torture / Freedom of expression   Geneva, April 17th, 2003  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information regarding the following situation in Egypt.  New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Egyptian Organisation of Human Rights (EOHR), a member of the OMCT network, of the violent repression of anti-war demonstrators in Cairo, as well as the arrest of many demonstrators and the ill-treatment and torture of several of their number.  According to the information received, on April 12th, 2003, the journalists' syndicate held a peaceful assembly demonstrating against the war in Iraq and Israeli action against Palestinians. Security forces reportedly arrested the following demonstrators: Mohammed Hassan Hassan, Omar Abdel Latif, Waleed Abd El Razek, and Wael Tawfeek. Ramez Gehad Fathi Abdel Aziz was arrested at five o'clock pm while at the El Horaya Café in Bab El Louk, Cairo attending to his duties as editor for the newspaper International News. Mr. Aziz was reportedly arrested because he was in the same place as demonstrators. Journalist Ibrahim El Sahari was reportedly arrested in his home. Unconfirmed reports indicate that Omar Abdel Latif was released April 15th, 2003, after suffering beatings and psychological torture including threats to his family. OMCT has received unconfirmed reports that some of these individuals have been interrogated, ill-treated, and tortured, including beatings, electric shocks, suspension and threats toward the individuals and their families.   OMCT is in particular gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Mohammed Hassan Hassan, Omar Abdel Latif, Waleed Abd El Razek, Wael Tawfeek, and Ramez Gehad Fathi Abdel Aziz, due to the allegations that demonstrators have been subjected to ill-treatment and/or torture during detention. OMCT calls for the immediate release of all persons being detained as a result of the demonstrations, unless there are valid legal charges against them, which are in line with international law, and for their procedural rights to be guaranteed at all times. OMCT calls on the authorities to guarantee the detainees’ procedural rights at all times and to guarantee that they be given fair trials. OMCT calls upon the Egyptian Government to launch prompt and impartial investigations into all allegations of ill-treatment or torture, in order to bring the perpetrators of these acts to justice. OMCT urges the authorities to ensure that all injured persons are provided with adequate reparation, including medical assistance.  Brief reminder of the situation  According to the information received, the Egyptian authorities have been using excessive force to repress anti-war demonstrations since the outset of the conflict in Iraq. They have reportedly arrested tens of demonstrators and there are serious allegations that they have subjected a number of these detainees to ill-treatment and torture.  Demonstrations broke out in Cairo as the war in Iraq began on March 20th, 2003. Tens of thousands of demonstrators gathered in Tahrir Square in downtown Cairo and were met with violent repression by the police. It is reported that the police use disproportionate force in order to keep the demonstrators back from the American and British embassies, causing injuries to many demonstrators. The police also reportedly began arresting large numbers of people during protests held over subsequent days. According to the information received, protests broke out in Al-Azhar Mosque, Talaat Harb Square, Ramses Street, and the State Broadcasting Corporation on March 21st, 2003.   On March 21st, the police began to beat demonstrators who were pushing against a barrier on Talaat Harb Street. Police reportedly fired water cannons into the crowd, beat demonstrators with clubs and made many arrests. According to the information received, the police also occupied the Egyptian Bar Association for almost six hours, and arrested more than 15 lawyers, some of whom were beaten during this time. Many of these lawyers had reportedly previously defended anti-war demonstrators.   On April 4th, 2003, anti-war activists were arrested as they were taking part in a peaceful demonstration. It is reported that leaders and activists from the El Wafd, El Tegemoah and El Nasiree political parties went to El Sayida Square in Cairo to express their objections to the United States-led war in Iraq. Thirty-four of the demonstrates were reportedly released, while the other eleven were taken to central security headquarters in El Darassa, in order to be presented before the state prosecutors in El Khalifa.  According to information received, there has been a large incidence of torture within the detention centres where the demonstrators have been held. Reports include the use of electric shocks, beatings that included the use of sticks and clubs, as well as the threat of rape towards the women, giving rise to grave concerns that the detainees in question here are being or risk being subjected to such treatment. For more information concerning the identities of these detainees, please see the two previous appeals concerning this case.  Action requested:  Please write to the authorities in Egypt urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the aforementioned persons ; ii.	order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iii.	intervene with the appropriate authorities in order to secure that the adequate medical assistance is provided as a matter of urgency to the prisoner(s); iv.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events, notably the allegations of torture, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; v.	put an immediate end to the persecution and harassment of anti-war demonstrators; vi.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with international human rights standards.  Addresses:  ·	H.E. President Mohammad Hosni Mubarak, Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, Email: Webmaster@presidency.gov.eg ·	H.E. Faruq Sayf al-Nasr, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, Midan Lazoghly, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 795 8103, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg ·	H.E. General Habib Ibrahim El Adly, Minister of the Interior, Al – Sheik Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: + 202 579 2031, e-mail: moi@idsc.gov  Please also write to the embassies of Egypt in your respective country.  Geneva, April 17th, 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 