Lao People's Democ. Rep.:  'Laos : Open letter to the Prime Minister, Mr. Bounyang Vorachit
August 21, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Lao People's Democ. Rep. / 2003 / AugustLao People's Democ. Rep.: 'Laos : Open letter to the Prime Minister, Mr. Bounyang VorachitOPEN LETTER TO BOUNYANG VORACHIT Prime Minister of the Lao People's Democratic Republic  Geneva, Paris, 20 August 2003  M. Prime Minister,  The International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World  Organization Against Torture (OMCT), in the framework of their joint  program the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders,  would like to express their deepest concern with regard to the  serious restrictions to freedom of expression, demonstration and  association in Laos, all enshrined in the Universal Declaration on  Human Rights and in the International Covenant on Civil and Political  Rights which Laos signed in December 2000.  Article 31 of the Laos Constitution states that "Lao citizens have  the right and freedom of speech, press and assembly; and have the  right to set up associations and to stage demonstrations which are  not contrary to the law." These rights are limited by the Lao Penal  Code which forbids to slander the State, distort party or state  policies, incite disorder, or propagate information or opinions that  weaken the State and participation in an organization for the purpose  of demonstrations, protest marches, or other acts that cause "turmoil  or social instability", providing for imprisonment of between one and  five years.  According to the information received by the Observatory the use that  is being made of these restrictions seems to impede any space for  expression of Lao human rights defenders, in contradiction with  article 1 of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the  UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998 that provides that "everyone  has the right, individually and in association with others, to  promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human  rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international  levels". Indeed, any person who dares express positions that are  contrary to official positions or ask for democratic reforms faces  systematically risks of arrest and detention.  In this regard, the Observatory is particularly concerned about the  fate of Lao nationals who attempted to exercise their rights to  freedom of expression and demonstration and who remain in detention.  These include five members of the ''Lao Students Movement for  Democracy of 26 October 1999", arrested in October 1999. According to  the information received, Thongpaseuth Keuakoun, Khamphouvieng  Sisaath, Seng-Aloun Phengphanh, Bouavanh Chanhmanivong and Keochay  were among a group of people who had attempted to publicly call for  the respect of human rights, the release of political prisoners, a  multi-party political system and elections for a new National  Assembly.  Some other people who participated in similar gatherings have simply  "disappeared" as is the case of 15 people, arrested during a  demonstration in Champassak Province, in November 2000, and whose  whereabouts remain unknown. This is also the case of about 20 civil  servants, teachers and students who took part in a pro-justice and  pro-human rights gathering, in Paksé (Champassak Province), in  October 2001. After being detained in a detention center of the  special police, they were led to an unknown place and no more  information have been heard of them since then.  The Observatory is also very concerned by the serious restrictions of  freedom of association in Laos. Indeed, there is still no possibility  of establishing rights monitoring human rights groups inside the  country. If the Constitution provides citizens with the right to  organize and join associations, this right is severely restricted in  practice. The Government registers and controls all associations and  prohibits associations that criticize it. This violates article 5.b  of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, which stipulates  that "for the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and  fundamental freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in  association with others, at the national and international levels "to  form, join and participate in non-governmental organisations,  associations or groups". On the political level, political groups  other than popular front organizations approved by the LPRP are  forbidden. In fact, article 3 of the Constitution imposes the LPRP as  the leading nucleus of the Lao political  system.  In the economic and social field, trade union freedom does still not  exist. Even though the 1994 Labour Code states that "workers and  employers shall have the right to  organize and belong to any mass and social organization that has been  formed lawfully" the practice shows that the government does not  register workers' organizations  that are not affiliated to the Lao Federation of Trade Unions (LFTU),  the single national centre, which is directly controlled by the Lao  People's Revolutionary Party (LPRP).  There is virtually no workers' representation on the joint ventures  funded by private capital, despite a requirement in Article 11 of the  Labour Code that a trade union must be  established in "all labour units in accordance with specific  regulations of the sectors concerned."   The Observatory reminds that Laos signed the International Covenant  on Economic and Cultural Rights in 2000. However, the Observatory  regrets that Laos has still not  ratified this instrument and that the Laos authorities have taken no  action regarding the two core ILO Conventions on freedom of  association (n°87 and n°98).  The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders calls on  Laos authorities to take the present submission into account and to  release all persons arbitrarily  detained in violation of freedom of expression, to provide  information on the whereabouts of all the people who have disappeared  following their arrests in pro-democratic  demonstrations and to conform with the Universal Declaration on Human  Rights and the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, which all  guarantee freedom of expression, demonstration and association.  Furthermore, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights  Defenders urges Laos authorities to ratify the International Covenant  on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant for  Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.  We thank you for your attention. We remain,     Sidiki KABA	President of FIDH				 Eric SOTTAS     Director of OMCT 