Zimbabwe:  Zimbabwe: arbitrary dismissal of 627 teachers arrest of 3 union leaders
October 12, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Zimbabwe / 2002 / OctoberZimbabwe: Zimbabwe: arbitrary dismissal of 627 teachers arrest of 3 union leadersCase ZWE 121002. ESCRC/ ZWE 121002 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS CONCERN/ URGENT APPEAL Arbitrary dismissal/Arrests/Personal Integrity   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Zimbabwe.   Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU), a member of the OMCT network, of the dismissal by the Public Service Commission of Zimbabwe of 627 teachers involved in a strike action and the arrest of three union leaders.  According to the information received, 627 teachers were dismissed on October 14th 2002 by the Public Service Commission, an independent organism mandated to manage the hiring, promotion and dismissal of public servants in Zimbabwe. It is reported that the teachers had been on strike since last week, asking for a long-awaited wage increase that would compensate their loss of purchasing power following the inflation and devaluation of the Zimbabwean currency, the Zimbabwean dollar (Z$). According to the information received, although the Permanent Secretary of Education, Sports and Culture, Dr. Thompson Tsodzo, had assured the teachers that their case was being considered, the strike was declared illegal by the government.  It is also reported that Raymond Majongwe, the Secretary General of the Progressive Teachers’ Union of Zimbabwe (PTUZ) was arrested for his picket action, allegedly for threatening teachers who were not involved in the strike. According to the information received, Mr. Majongwe was injured during his 48-hours in police custody, and appeared before the court with a torn shirt and injuries to one eye and an arm. It is reported that two other leaders of the PTUZ, Innocent Moyo and Enock Paradzayi, were also arrested on October 15 on public order charges.   The International Secretariat of the OMCT is therefore gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned persons, given that Raymond Majongwe has reportedly received injuries while in police custody, and more generally for the human rights situation of Zimbabwean workers.    Action Requested  Please write to the Zimbabwean authorities urging them to:  i.	order the immediate release of the persons detained in connection with these events, in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times;  ii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these events, identify those responsible, bring them before a competent and impartial civil tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law;  iii.	immediately reinstate the 627 dismissed teachers;  iv.	guarantee the respect for economic, social and cultural rights and labour rights of the workers, including the right to work, the right to fair wages guaranteeing a decent living for the workers and their families, the right to form and join trade unions and the right to strike.   Addresses  . President Robert Mugabe Fax: 263 4 79 03 16 / 263 4 73 46 44.  . Home Affairs Ministry Mr. Dumiso Dabenjwa Fax: 263 4 72 67 16.   Please also write to the embassies of Zimbabwe in your respective country   Geneva, October 17th, 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 