Morocco:  Morocco: arbitrary arrests, incommunicado detention and torture of two Western Sahara citizens
May 27, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Morocco / 2002 / MayMorocco: Morocco: arbitrary arrests, incommunicado detention and torture of two Western Sahara citizensCase MAR 270502 Torture / Imprisonment and Arbitrary detentions   The International Secretariat of the OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Morocco/Western Sahara  Brief description of the situation:  The International Secretariat of the OMCT has been informed that Mr. Dris Bilal Jatri Sidi Barra, a West Saharan national, has been subject to arbitrary detention and torture, as well as Mr. Taher Saad Buh Abderrahman, who has been arbitrarily detained and later put in a prison in Morocco.   According to the information received from the Association of the Families of Prisoners and the Disappeared of Western Sahara (AFAPREDESA), on May 22th 2002, at around 11:00 a.m., Mr. Dris Bilal Jatri Sidi Barra, a West Saharan citizen who allegedly suffers from a mental illness, was arrested by members of the Moroccan police. It is claimed that the victim was subject to torture, which left severe wounds to his stomach and face. At around 5:00 a.m., after having been tortured, Mr. Dris Bilal was taken to the entrance of the Ben El Medí de El Aaiún hospital, where he was abandoned. The reports claim that at the time of his arrest, Mr. Dris Bilal Jatri Sidi Barra had inscriptions on his arms texts that advocated the independence of the Western Saharan people and were in favour of the Polisario Front.    Separately, reports inform that an anti-personal mine explosed near the border between Morocco and Argel, wounding Mr. Taher Saad Buh Abderrahman, also a West Saharan citizen (the exact date is unknown). In the incident, Mr. Taher Saad lost one of his legs. The Moroccan Armed Forces took Mr. Taher Saad to the Moroccan Royal Police Headquarters, who then transferred him further inside the country.  According to the information received, Mr. Taher Saad Buh Abderrahman is now detained in the military quarter of Agadir, after having been in the military base of Buzacaren (near Gulimin) in the south of Morocco. The reports affirm that despite his poor health, Mr. Taher Saad has not been allowed to see his family, who live in Aaiún. He has also not been explained the reasons or motives for his detention.  The International Secretariat of the OMCT shares the concerns of the Association of the Families of Prisoners and the Disappeared of Western Sahara (AFAPREDESA), and other human rights organizations concerning the situation in which the West Saharan population live; for the situation of the West Saharan detainees in the Moroccan prisons and their families, and in particular for the security and physical and psychological integrity of Messrs. Taher Saad Buh Abderrahman and Dris Bilal Jatri Sidi Barra.   Action required:  Please write to the authorities in Morocco urging them to:  i.	Take the necessary measures to guarantee the security and physical and psychological integrity of the West Saharan population, and in particular of Mssrs. Taher Saad Buh Abderrahman and Dris Bilal Jatri Sidi Barra, including access to adequate medical care;   ii.	order the immediate release of Mr. Taher Saad Buh Abderrahman in the case that he had been detained without valid judicial charges, or in case of having valid charges, guarantee his rights to an independent and impartial trial;  iii.	carry out a thorough and impartial investigation, regarding the cases of arbitrary detentions, tortures, and ill-treatment, and guarantee that those responsible are brought to trial and that the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions are applied as provided by law;  iv.	guarantee the respect for the human rights and fundamental liberties of all the population, including the West Saharan community, as stipulated by the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and by the regional and international conventions, in particular regarding the Principles and Norms for the treatment of prisoners, which has been ratified by Morocco.   Addresses:  ·	S.M.  Mohammed VI.  Ibn Al Hassan, Roi du Maroc, Palais Royal, Rabat, Morocco. Fax : (+ 212 7) 73 07 72.   ·	M.  Abderrahmane El Youssoufi, Premier Ministre, Bureau du Premier  Ministre et Ministre des Affaires Etrangères et de la Coopération, Palais  Royal, Rabat, Maroc. Fax (+ 212 7) 76 99 95    //   76 91 95 ou 77 68 37  ·	M.  Driss Basri, Ministre de l’Interieur, Quartier Administratif, Rabat, Maroc.  Fax : (+212 7) 76 20 56 / 76 64  ·	M. Omar Azziman, Ministre de la Justice et des Droits de l’Homme, Palais de la Manounia, Rabat, Maroc.  Fax:  (+212 7) 73 89 40 / 73 27 10  ·	M. Driss Dahak, President du Conseil Consultatif des Droits de l’Homme (CCDH), Place des Chouhada, B.P. 1341, Rabat, Maroc.  Fax:  (+212 7) 72 68 56  Please also write to the diplomatic representatives of Morocco in your country.  Geneva, May 27th 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 