China:  Enforced disapperances of two Tibetan writers
February 21, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / China / 2012 / FebruaryChina: Enforced disapperances of two Tibetan writersCHN 210212
Enforced disappearances/
Risk of torture and ill-treatment
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the People’s Republic of China.

Brief description of the situation
TheInternational
Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by The Tibetan Centre for Human Rights
and Democracy (TCHRD), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the enforced
disappearances of two Tibetan writers, Mr. Gangkye
Drubpa Kyab, 33 years old, and Mr. Dawa
Dorjee, who is in his 20’s. OMCT fears that they may be at risk of torture and
ill-treatment. 
According to the information received, in the night of
15 February 2012, Mr. Gangkye Drubpa Kyab, who has also been a teacher
for many years, was arrested at his home in Serta (Chinese: Seda) County, Kardze
Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture (TAP), Sichuan Province, by about 20 police
officers. When his wife asked the security officers why and where he was being
taken, the officers reportedly replied that they had to question him about
something. His whereabouts and fate are currently unknown. 
OMCT has also been informed about the enforced
disappearance, since 3 February 2012, of another well known Tibetan writer and
advocate of Tibet’s traditional culture and language from Deru County, Nagchu
Prefecture, Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR), Mr. Dawa Dorjee. He was reportedly
arrested by Chinese security personnel at Lhasa Gonggar Airport on 3 February 2012, after he participated in a cultural
conference in Chengdu city. He was transferred to an unknown destination.
Mr. Dawa Dorjee had published the book “Lahm” (English translation: “Road”)
which discusses democracy, freedom and human rights. 
The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely
concerned about the safety of Messrs Gangkye Drubpa Kyab and Dawa Dorjee, as their whereabouts and fate remain unknown.OMCT fears
that they may be subjected to torture or other ill-treatment. OMCT urges the
competent authorities to guarantee their physical and psychological integrity
at all times, in accordance with international human rights law, in particular
the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and to immediately locate and disclose their whereabouts.
Enforced disappearance and torture and other ill-treatment constitute serious
human rights violations and are strictly prohibited under international law. 
OMCT further calls on the competent authorities to order their
immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent with international law and
standards, or, if such charges exist, bring them promptly before an impartial,
independent and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all
times, including immediate and unconditional access to a lawyer of their
choice. 
Actions
Requested 
Please write to the
authorities in the People’s Republic of China urging them to:
i.                    
Immediately
locate and disclose the whereabouts of Messrs Gangkye Drubpa Kyab and Dawa Dorjee;

ii.                  
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, their physical and psychological integrity;  
iii.                 
Grant them
immediate and full access to a lawyer of their choice and their families, as
well as guarantee that they are examined by independent doctors and receive
adequate medical care if necessary, in accordance, inter alia, with the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of
Prisoners; 
iv.                
Order their immediate release in the absence of valid
legal charges that are
consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist,
bring them before an impartial, independent and competent tribunal and
guarantee their procedural rights at all times;
v.                  
Guarantee
the
respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
·  
   Mr. Wen
Jiabao, Prime Minister of the People’s Republic of China, Guojia Zongli, The
State Council General Office, 2 Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017,
People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 65961109 (c/o
Ministry of Foreign Affairs)
·  
   Mr. Wu Aiying, Minister of Justice of the
People’s Republic of China, Buzhang Sifabu, 10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie,
Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6529
2345, minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cn
·  
   Mr. Meng Jianzhu,
Minister of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang,
Gong’anbu, 14 Dongchang’anjie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100741, People’s
Republic of China, Fax: +86 10
63099216

Director of the Sichuan Provincial
Department of Justice, Sifating, 24 Shangxiznglu, Chengdushi 610015,
Sichuansheng, People's Republic of China

·      Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China, Ch. De Surville, CP 85, 1213
Petit-Lancy 2, Suisse, e-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int, Fax : +41 22 793 70
14
Please also write to the embassies of the People’s Republic of China in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 21 February 2012
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 