Syrian Arab Republic:  Arbitrary arrest of activist within medical facilities puts his life in danger
January  9, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2012 / JanuarySyrian Arab Republic: Arbitrary arrest of activist within medical facilities puts his life in danger
 SYRIA - Arbitrary arrest of activist within medical 
facilities puts his life in danger
 
Copenhagen, Geneva, Paris, 9 January 2012. The Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights 
Network (EMHRN), the International Federation of Human Rights (FIDH) and the 
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) express their deepest concern as for 
the arbitrary arrest and incommunicado detention of 33 year old activist Mr. 
Anwar Lutfi Al Dabbas. 
 
According to the information received, on 1 January 2012, five members of 
the Air Force intelligence kidnapped Mr. Anwar Lutfi Al Dabbas in the 
operating room of the national hospital in Darya (Damascus) while he was under 
anesthesia to receive a surgery intervention. Reports indicate that Mr. Al 
Debbas was taken to an unknown location in an ambulance and that a number of 
members of security forces were surrounding the building during his abduction. 

 
Mr. Al Dabbas was shot in the back during a peaceful rally protest 
organized on January 1st in Darya, as members of the Arab League 
observation team were expected to visit the city. Mr. Al Dabbas had to undertake 
a surgery intervention to remove a bullet that remained in his lung. His life is 
in danger.  
 
Information received by our organizations indicate that Mr. Al Dabbas has 
been involved in a number of peaceful protests in the city of Darya. He is also 
the brother in law of activist Ghiath Al Matar, who appears to have been killed 
under torture by the Air Force intelligence on 10 September 2011, four days 
after he was arbitrarily arrested.    
 
Mr. Al Dabbas is in vital need of urgent and adequate medical 
treatment. His arrest is a blatant violation of international humanitarian law 
and puts his life in danger. The Syrian authorities should guarantee, in all circumstances, his physical and psychological 
integrity, release him 
without delay and ensure without any 
interference that he 
receives adequate medical care in accordance with, inter alia, the United Nations 
Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any Form of Detention 
or Imprisonment. 
 
Our organizations are extremely concerned by 
the systematic campaign of arbitrary arrests carried out by the Syrian security 
forces against activists and victims of the repression of the movement of 
protest, notably within medical facilities. We remind that according to the 
protocol signed by Syria and the Secretariat of the Arab League on 19 December 
2011, the Arab League observation mission, which is currently visiting Syria, 
has the mandate to ensure that all persons arbitrarily detained in relation with 
their participation to peaceful protests are released.
 
For further information, 
please contact:
·        
EMHRN: Hayet Zeghiche : +32 48 73 61 
931
·        OMCT: 
Gerald Staberock: + 41 22 809 49 39
·        FIDH: Arthur Manet: + 33 1 
43 55 25 18 