Iraq:  Need to ensure the protection of the residents of Camp Ashraf
November 11, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Iraq / 2011 / NovemberIraq: Need to ensure the protection of the residents of Camp Ashraf​Iraq: Need to ensure the protection of the residents of Camp AshrafGeneva, 11 November 2011. The OMCT
calls on the authorities of Iraq to ensure the full respect for the rights of
the residents of Camp Ashraf located in Iraq and on the international community
to step up its efforts to prevent serious human rights violations and the
forcible return of its residents to Iran in violation of the principle of
non-refoulement.
“The deadline set by the Iraqi government
to close Camp Ashraf by the end of 2011 without a safe solution for its
residents, causes an acute risk of grave and serious human rights violations”,
said Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of the OMCT. 
The Iraqi
government has repeatedly stated that the camp should be closed and its
residents expelled from Iraq.
Recent statements by Iraqi’s Prime Minister and Foreign Minister to close down
the camp by the end of 2011 without a safe solution for its residents are all
the more alarming. The OMCT recalls that Iraq has clear obligations under international
human rights law to ensure the safety of the camps residents’ and that it is
prohibited to forcible return them to Iran, where they may face torture,
ill-treatment and other serious human rights violations. 
“We enter a period that requires
extreme vigilance and concerted efforts by the international community,
including the UN Secretary General, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the UN Mission in Iraq to ensure the safety of
the camps residents until a lasting solution has been found”, said Gerald
Staberock. 
In a letter
to the European Union’s Special Representative on Camp
Ashraf,
who was recently appointed by the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy of the European Union, OMCT expressed its concerned about the
safety of Camp
Ashraf’s
residents. 
On 13 September 2011,
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) declared in a
statement that the residents of Camp
Ashraf
are “formally asylum seekers” and called on the government of Iraq
to extend “the deadline for the closure of the camp” in view of examining the
request for refugee status in a timely and proper manner. However, the Iraqi
government remains determined to proceed with the closure of the camp by the
end of the year. The OMCT considers that it is absolutely central that this
process can now go forward in an environment of safety and with all the
necessary guarantees and unhindered and unimpeded access by the UNHCHR. 
Camp Ashraf, which is located in
Diyala province, 90 km north-east of Bagdad,
is home to 3,400 unarmed civilians, members
of the People’s Mojahedin Organisation of Iran (PMOI), an Iranian opposition group. In July 2004, its
residents were entitled as “protected persons” to the protections provided in
the Fourth Geneva Convention (1949). The United States of America (USA) administration also signed an agreement with each resident to protect
them until their final disposition. In January 2009, the USA handed the protection of Camp Ashraf over to the authorities of Iraq. However, despite guarantees by the Iraqi
government, the camp has been raided on two occasions by the Iraqi security
forces since 2009 in view of expulsing its residents and closing
the camp. The attacks led to the deaths of 47 residents and hundreds of injured. The
residents have also been subjected to numerous acts of harassment,
among others, family members or lawyers being prevented from entering the camp
and the use by Iraqi security forces of powerful loudspeakers to
psychologically harass them.
The OMCT calls on the Iraqi
authorities:
-         
to guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and
psychological integrity of Camp Ashraf residents, including by not forcibly
returning any resident to Iran, where she/he would be at risk of torture and
other ill-treatment, in line with Iraq’s obligations to ensure the protection
of human rights to all those under its jurisdiction; 
-         
to lift the self-proclaimed deadline to close Camp Ashraf and ensure that the
UNHRC can carry out individual interviews in a safe, neutral and confidential
location; 
-         
to allow the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) and the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) to monitor the human
rights situation in Camp Ashraf. 
We equally request the international
community, including the Secretary General of the United Nations, the UN Assistance
Mission for Iraq to use their influence
and good office to prevent further human rights violations. We also believe
that this is the time of Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR)
-         
to urge the Iraqi government to extend or lift the
deadline to close Camp Ashraf until all its residents
have been safely resettled and reject any forcible relocation; 
-         
to urge the Iraqi government to
fully respect the human rights of Camp Ashraf residents and to put an end to
all harassment faced by the residents; 
-         
to formally request to monitor the human rights situation in Camp Ashraf until all
its residents have been safely resettled by dispatching observers to the camp. 