Thailand:  Summoning and ongoing judicial harassment of Sirikan “June” Charoensiri, from Thai Lawyers for Human Rights (TLHR)
July 26, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2016 / JulyThailand: Summoning and ongoing judicial harassment of Sirikan “June” Charoensiri, from Thai Lawyers for Human Rights (TLHR)
New
information
THA 002 / 0715 / OBS 055.6
Ongoing
Judicial Harassment
Thailand
July 26, 2016
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the
following situation in Thailand. 
New information:The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the summoning of Ms. Sirikan
“June” Charoensiri, a human rights lawyer with the organisation Thai
Lawyers for Human Rights (TLHR)[1], in connection with her work
representing 14 activists of the Neo Democracy Movement (NDM). 
According to
the information received, on July 27, 2016, at 9:30 am, Ms. Sirikan will report
to the Office of the Prosecutor of Dusit District in Bangkok to hear if the
prosecutor has decided to prosecute her on charges of “concealing evidence”
(Article 142 of the Criminal Code)[2]
and “failure to comply with an official order” (Article 368 of the Criminal
Code)[3].
If found guilty of all
charges, Ms. Sirikan could face imprisonment of up to three years and/or a fine
of up to 6,000 baht (approximately 156 euros).
The Observatory strongly condemns the ongoing judicial
harassment against Ms. Sirikan, which aims to hinder her legitimate work as a
human rights lawyer, and calls on the Thai authorities to immediately drop all
charges against her.
Furthermore, until all charges are dropped
against Ms. Sirikan, the Observatory urges the Thai authorities to ensure that
all judicial proceedings against her are carried out in full compliance with
her right to a fair trial, as provided for under international law.
Background
information: 
On June 26, 2015, police arrested 14 student activists of
the Neo Democracy Movement (NDM)[4]
pursuant to an arrest warrant issued by the Bangkok Military Court. All were
charged with violating the Head of the National Council for Peace and Order
(NCPO) Order No. 3/2015, which bans gatherings of five or more people, and
Article 116 of the Thai Criminal Code ("sedition"). Ms. Sirikan
together with seven other TLHR lawyers assisted the 14 students at the Bangkok
Military Court. 
On the night of June 26-27, 2015, after Ms. Sirikan had
finished her duty of providing legal assistance to the 14 activists, more than
10 police officers stationed by the Bangkok Military Court, including Pol. Maj.
Gen. Chayapol Chatchaidej, commander of the Sixth Division of Metropolitan
Police Bureau, requested access to Ms. Sirikan's car in order to search for the
mobile phones of the activist students. Following Ms. Sirikan's refusal due to
the lack of a court warrant and relying on the special protection of lawyers
and of the lawyer-client confidentiality, the police officers impounded Ms.
Sirikan's car overnight. 
At 12:45 pm on June 27, Ms. Sirikan filed a complaint
against Pol. Maj. Gen. Chayapol Chatchayadetch and others for
"malfeasance" (Article 157 of Thai Criminal Code) for illegally
impounding her car. While Ms. Sirikan was in the process of filing the
complaint, a police team arrived at the site of her seized car at 3:30 pm with
a search warrant. Officials from the Office of Police Forensic Science
accompanied the police to conduct the search. 
Upon presentation of the search warrant, Ms. Sirikan, who
went back on the spot, agreed to open her car. Equipment found in the car
included TLHR's case files, personal computers of the seven TLHR lawyers and
personal belongings of the student activists including mobile phones. Five
mobile phones belonging to the students were confiscated and placed into a
sealed envelope, which was turned over to the custody of the Office of Police
Forensic Science. 
Ms. Sirikan subsequently returned to the Chanasongkram
police station in Bangkok to file a second complaint against Pol. Maj. Gen.
Chayapol Chatchaidej and his subordinates for "malfeasance", despite
being threatened that the police would then file a counter suit against her. 
On June 28, 2015, Metropolitan Police Commissioner Pol Lt
Gen Srivara Rangsipramkul told reporters that the police had recovered
important evidence from Ms. Sirikan's car and that the police were considering
whether to press charges against her. 
On June 29, 2015, police visited the house of Ms. Sirikan's
parents in her hometown and asked her mother to identify her in various photos
and asked about her daughter's background.
On July 7, 2015, the Bangkok Military Court ordered the
release of the 14. However, the charges against them remained pending. 
On February 2, 2016, Ms. Sirikan received a police summons
to report to Bangkok's Chanasongkram police station on February 9, 2016, to
hear criminal charges filed against her under Articles 172 ("filing a
false police report") and 368 ("failure to comply with official
orders") of the Criminal Code as a result of the lawsuit filed by
Ms. Sirikan against Thai police for “malfeasance” in June 2015. 
On February 9, 2016, Ms. Sirikan appeared at the
Chanasongkram police station in Bangkok and was formally charged with “failure
to comply with official orders” (Article 368 of the Criminal Code) and with
“concealing evidence” (Article 142).

On April 27, 2016, Ms. Sirikan was
summoned to appear before the Public Prosecutor at the Subdistrict 3 Court in
Dusit, Bangkok, at 10 am on May 12, 2016. In that occasion, Ms. Sirikan
submitted a letter of petition to him describing the circumstances of the facts
happened the night of June 26-27, 2015, as well as requesting the prosecutor to
hear more witnesses, including members of the NDM, herself, Ms. Yaowalak
Anuphan, the Head of the TLHR and the inquiry official who had received the
complaint for “malfeasance”. The prosecutor announced he would
continue with the investigation and adjourned the hearing to July 27, 2016.
Moreover, a second case brought against Ms. Sirikan on
the alleged charges of “providing false information concerning a criminal
offence likely to cause damage to others or the public” (Articles 172
and 174) is yet to be proceeded, due to the inability of the inquiry
officer to indicate the alleged false statements or information that
she has been accused of reporting to the police. If the charges were to be
further proceeded, Ms. Sirikan could face imprisonment of up to five years
and a fine of up to 10,000 baht (approximately 253 euros).
Actions requested:Please write to the authorities of Thailand asking them to:

i. Immediately and unconditionally drop all charges against Ms. Sirikan, and
put an end to all acts of judicial harassment against her, as well as against
all human rights defenders in Thailand;
ii. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of Ms. Sirikan and all human rights defenders in
Thailand;
iii. Comply with the national and international legislation
safeguarding the independence of lawyers and protecting them from unlawful
interference in their professional activities;

vii. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9,
1998, especially its Articles 1 and 12.2;

viii. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Thailand.
Addresses:
·    
Gen
Prayuth Chan-ocha, Prime Minister of Thailand, Fax: +66 (0) 2 282 5131
·    
Don
Pramudwinai, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax: +66 (0) 2 643 5320; Email: minister@mfa.go.th
·    
Gen
Paiboon Khumchaya, Minister of Justice, Fax: +66 (0) 2 953 0503
·    
Pol
Gen Somyot Poompanmoung, Commissioner-General of the Royal Thai Police, Fax:
+66 (0) 2 251 5956 / +66 (0) 2 251 8702
·    
Mr.
Wat Tingsamit, Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission of Thailand;
Email: help@nhrc.or.th 
·    
H.E. Mr. Thani Thongphakdi,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of
Thailand to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: + 41 22 715 10 00 /
10 02; Email: mission.thailand@ties.itu.int
·    
H.E.
Ms. Busaya Mathelin, Ambassador, Embassy of Thailand in Brussels,
Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 648 30 66; Email: thaibxl@thaiembassy.be
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy
of Thailand in your respective country.



[1]                 TLHR is an organisation set up
after the 2014-coup to provide legal aid to civilian arrested and/or prosecuted
by military, and monitor and document post-coup human rights situations and
violations throughout Thailand.


[2]                 Section 142 states: “Whoever,
damaging, destroying, concealing, making away with, losing or rendering useless
any property or document seized or being kept by an official, or ordered to be
sent as evidence or for execution of the law, whether the official keeps such
property or document himself, or ordering such person or the other person to
send or keep it, shall be punished with imprisonment not exceeding three years
or fine not exceeding six thousand Baht, or both.” 


[3]                 Section 368 states: “Whoever, being informed of an
order of an official given according to the power invested by law, refuses to
comply with the same without any reasonable cause or excuse, shall be punished
with imprisonment not exceeding ten days or fined not exceeding five hundred
Baht, or both. If such order is an order authorized by law requiring a person
to assist in carrying on the activities in the function of an official, the
offender shall be punished with imprisonment not exceeding one month or fined not
exceeding one thousand Baht, or both.”


[4]                 NDM is an organisation advocating for the restoration
of democracy, for the end of trials against civilians before military courts,
and for the respect of human rights and freedoms. The 14 activists were: Mr.
Rangsiman Rome, Mr. Wasant Sadesit, Mr. Songtham Kaewpanphruek, Mr. Payu
Boonsopon, Mr. Apiwat Suntararak, Mr. Rattapol Supasophon, Mr. Supachai
Pookhlongploy, Mr. Apisit Sapnapaphan, Mr.Panupong Sritananuwat, Mr. Suvicha Pitungkorn,
Mr. Pakorn Areekul, Mr. Chatupat Boonyapatraksa, Mr. Pornchai Yuanyee and Ms.
Chonticha Chaengreo. 