Brazil:  Death threats against Mr. Davi Kopenawa, shaman and internationally renowned Spokesman for the Yanomami tribe in the Brazilian Amazon rainforest
August  6, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Brazil / 2014 / AugustBrazil: Death threats against Mr. Davi Kopenawa, shaman and internationally renowned Spokesman for the Yanomami tribe in the Brazilian Amazon rainforest ​












BRA 001 / 0814 / OBS 068
Death threats
Brazil
August 6, 2014
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Brazil. 
 
Brief description of the information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable
sources about death threats against Mr. Davi Kopenawa, shaman and internationally renowned Spokesman for the Yanomami
tribe in the Brazilian Amazon rainforest and Chairman of the indigenous
rights organisation Yanomami Association Hutukara (Hutukara Associação Yanomami - HAY)[1],
following his successful campaign against gold miners, who are now facing
eviction from Yanomami territory.
 (c) Horizon Films / OMCT - 2012
According to the information received, on July
28, 2014, Mr. Davi Kopenawa lodged a formal request to the federal police
of Roraima, asking for urgent protection for himself, his son
and colleagues after receiving a series
of death threats by armed thugs reportedly hired by gold miners operating
illegally on Yanomami land. However, Mr.
Kopenawa has yet to receive police
protection.
 
In May already, the Director of
HAY Mr. Armindo Góes received a message from gold miners that Mr. Davi Kopenawa would « not be
alive by the end of the year ». As a precaution, the association decided
to restrict the activities and movement of its Chairman. 
 
However, in June 2014, two armed
men on motorbikes entered the headquarters of the Socio-Environmental
Institute (Instituto Socioambiental - ISA) in Boa Vista, which works closely with the
Yanomami, asking for Mr. Davi Kopenawa.
The men threatened ISA's staff with guns and stole computers and other
equipment. After the assault, one of the men was arrested and reported that he
had been hired by gold miners.
 
Since then, men on motorbikes have been repeatedly seen prowling
around HAY and ISA headquarters and asking for Mr. Davi Kopenawa. 

The Observatory is
extremely concerned by the above-mentioned death threats against Mr. Davi Kopenawa, which merely aim at sanctioning his
human rights activities as a renowned indigenous leader and land rights human rights defender.
 
The Observatory indeed
recalls that Mr. Davi Kopenawa has been at the forefront of the struggle to
protect the Amazon rainforest from destruction and in particular Yanomami land
for decades. Moreover, it is believed that these threats follow his successful fight for the demarcation of the Yanomami territory, after an
invasion of thousands of illegal gold miners in the 1980s decimated the tribe. In February 2014, the Government of Brazil launched in collaboration with HAY a major
operation to evict hundreds of illegal gold miners and to destroy mining infrastructure from Yanomami land.
 
Actions requested:

Please write to the authorities in Brazil, urging them to:

i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
of Mr. Davi Kopenawa as well as of all HAY members and human rights defenders in Brazil;
 
ii. Carry out an immediate, thorough,
impartial and transparent investigation into the above-mentioned events in order to identify all those
responsible, bring them before an independent tribunal, and sanction them
as provided by the law;
 
iii. Put an end to any act of harassment against
Mr. Davi Kopenawa and all human rights defenders in Brazil, and ensure in all
circumstances that they are able to carry out their legitimate activities without
any hindrance or fear of reprisals or intimidation;
 
iv. Conform to the provisions of the UN Declaration
on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United
Nations on December 9, 1998, especially:
-       
Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and
in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”;
-       
Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary
measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone,
individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats,
retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary
action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights
referred to in the present Declaration”.

v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Brazil.

Addresses:
 
·    
H.E. Ms.
Dilma Rousseff, President of the Federative Republic of Brazil, Palácio do Planalto, Praça dos Três Poderes,
70150-900, Brasilia DF, Brazil.
·    
Ms. Ideli
Salvatti, Secretary for Human Rights, Secretariat for Human
Rights of the Presidency of the
Republic, Setor Comercial Sul - B, Quadra 9, Lote C, Edificio Parque
Cidade Corporate, Torre A, 10º andar, Brasília, Distrito Federal, Brasil - CEP:
70308-200. Email : direitoshumanos@sdh.gov.br; snpddh@sdh.gov.br. Twitter : @DHumanosBrasil
·    
Ms. Izabella Mônica Vieira Teixeira,
State Minister of the Environment, Ministry of the Environment, Esplanada dos
Ministérios - Bloco B, CEP 70068-900 - Brasília/DF, Brazil. FAX: 2028-1756.
Email : gm@mma.gov.br Twitter : @mmeioambiente
·    
H.E. Ms.
Regina Maria Cordeiro Dunlop, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Brazil to
the United Nations in Geneva, Chemin Louis-Dunant 15 (6th Floor), 1202 Geneva,
Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 910 07 51, Email: delbrasgen@itamaraty.gov.br
·    
H.E. Mr.
André Mattoso Maia Amado, Ambassador, Embassy of Brazil in Brussels, Louizalaan
350, 1050 Brussels, Belgium. Fax : +32 2 640 81 34, Email: brasbruxelas@beon.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or
embassy of Brazil in your respective country.

***
Geneva-Paris, August 6, 2014

Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.



[1] For more information on challenges and threats facing the indigenous
Yanomami and their defenders in
relation to illegal mining in Amazonia, see OMCT
Documentary "Amazon Indians on borrowed time": http://www.omct.org/human-rights-defenders/events/brazil/2012/09/d21946/ 