India:  Acts of harassment against Ms. Soni Sori,tribal rights activist and women’s rights defender
June 29, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / India / 2016 / JuneIndia: Acts of harassment against Ms. Soni Sori,tribal rights activist and women’s rights defender
New
information
IND 003 /
0316 / OBS 024.1
Obstacles to freedom of
movement / 
Harassment / Threats
India
June 29, 2016

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme
of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in India. 
New
Information:
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about acts of harassment
against Ms. Soni Sori,tribal rights activist and women’s
rights defender[1], and other members of a
fact-finding team[2] investigating a reported
incident of rape and a “fake encounter”[3]
killing of a young tribal woman in Gompad village,
Konta Tehsil, in Sukma district, Chhattisgarh State.
According to the information received, on June 15, 2016, a team
led by Ms. Soni Sori tried to visit the village of Gompad in Chhattisgarh State in
order to investigate a reported incident of rape by security forces and a “fake
encounter killing” of a young tribal woman[4]. However, the team was not able to reach the village of
Gompad as they were stopped and harassed at four different camps[5]
along the road. At each checkpoint, members of the team underwent
thorough questioning about their identity, the purpose of their mission, as
well as the places they were planning to visit. It is to be noted that the
police already had this information since the team had informed them of the
mission in advance. It is therefore believed that such interrogation was merely
aimed at harassing and delaying the team. The latter
was finally stopped just 10 km from the village and held for almost four hours
at the Injeram Camp. 
Eventually, in the
evening of June 15, 2016, Ms. Soni Sori and her colleagues returned to Sukma in
order to meet with the Collector[6]
and the Assistant Superintendent of Police (ASP) of Sukma, Mr. Santosh Singh.
ASP Singh, who refused to allow the fact-finding team to proceed with the
planned visit unless they were accompanied by a security official, adding that
no officer was available at the moment.
Ms. Soni Sori and other
members of her team subsequently decided to hold a protest before the Sukma Collectorate
until they would be allowed to proceed to the village and undertake their
mission. Ms. Sori also started a fast outside of the Sukma Collectorate on that
night[7].
On June 16, 2016, other
members of the Aam Aadmi Party, of which Ms. Sori is a member, joined the fact-finding
team and tried again to meet with police officers to get permission to visit
the village. The Sukma ASP then decided to allow
all team members to visit the village, with the exception of Ms. Sori, who was
denied the right to proceed beyond Konta village on the grounds that she needed
to be accompanied by a security official as "the State was responsible for
he security"[8], but that no such official
was available at the moment. 
Despite
the assurance from a high-ranking police officer that they could proceed with
the mission, all the members of the team were stopped again at the camps along
their way to Konta. In Konta, they were told that none of them could proceed
further to the village of Gompad. When
they left Konta police station, they faced an unruly mob of people who
threatened Ms. Soni with violence if she proceeded further towards the village,
while the police watched from the sidelines. On the next day, the same
unruly mob visited the team again at the government rest house where they had
spent the night, and again threatened them with physical violence. The team was
then forced to leave Konta.
The Observatory condemns
the above-mentioned restrictions to freedom of movement and acts of harassment
towards Ms. Soni Sori and other members of the above-mentioned fact-finding team, as they are clearly aimed at sanctioning their legitimate
human rights activities, and calls upon the Indian authorities
to immediately and unconditionally put an end to all acts of restrictions
and harassment against them, as well as against all human rights defenders in
the country.
Background
information: 
The Observatory recalls
that Ms. Soni Sori already faced reprisals in the past for denouncing
violations where members of the police forces were allegedly involved.
On February 20, 2016,
three unidentified men attacked Ms. Soni Sori while she was travelling home,
and threw a chemical substance on her face, which resulted in severe burning
and her hospitalization. The attackers threatened to pursue their attacks on
her daughter if she continued her work on the case of extra-judicial killing in
which several members of the police force were allegedly involved.
In the morning of March
10, 2016, Mr. Ajay Markam, Ms. Soni
Sori’s brother-in-law, was arbitrarily arrested in his home in the district of
Dantewada by the Jagdalpur police. In detention, the police officers and the
Chief Superintendent interrogated him regarding the attack of February 20 on
Ms. Soni Sori and threatened to charge him with organizing the assault. They
released him in the morning of March 12. Previously on March 1 and 9, 2016, the
police had already summoned him for questioning and during the interrogation
the officers physically and verbally abused him.
On March 11, 2016,
following the arrest of Mr. Ajay Markam, Ms. Soni Sori’s father as well as
other members of her family went to the Inspector General of the Bastar Police
to seek information about his situation and his whereabouts and share their
concerns regarding his arbitrary detention. In response, the Inspector General
threatened the family members to keep him in detention and claimed in addition
that the whole family would face consequences for Ms. Soni Sori’s work in
defense of human rights.
On the same day at 4 p.m.,
Ms. Dhani Markam, Ms. Soni
Sori’s sister and Mr. Markam’s wife, was also arrested and detained for
questioning at the same Jagdalpur police station as her husband. She was
released later that same night, after having been verbally abused and
threatened.
Actions
requested:
Please write to the authorities of
India asking them to:
i. Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Soni Sori, the other members of the above-mentioned fact-finding
mission, as well as of all human rights defenders in India;
ii. Put an end to any form of
harassment and restrictions to freedom of movement against Ms. Soni Sori, the other members of the above-mentioned fact-finding
mission as well as all human rights defenders in India so that they are able to carry out their work without hindrances;
iii.
Conduct a prompt, independent and thorough
investigation on the aforementioned act of harassment and threats against Ms.
Soni Sori in order to identify the perpetrators, bring them before an independent,
just and impartial tribunal and apply to them all the necessary administrative
and/or criminal sanctions foreseen by law;
iv. Conform in any
circumstances with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9,
1998, especially its Article 1 and 12.2;
v. More generally, ensure in all
circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with
international and regional human rights instruments ratified by India.
Addresses: 
·     Mr. Shri Nanredra Damodardas Modi, Prime Minister of India, Prime
Minister’s Office, Room number 152, South Block, New Delhi, India. Fax: + 91 11
2301 6857. E-mail: pmosb@pmo.nic.in / manmo@sansad.in
·     Mr. Raj Nath Singh, Union Minister of Home Affairs, Ministry of
Home Affairs, 104-107 North Block, New Delhi 110 001 India, Fax: +91 11 2309
2979. Email: dirfcra-mha@gov.in
·     Justice T.S. Thakur,, Chief Justice of India, Supreme Court, Tilak Marg, New
Delhi -1, India. Fax: +91 11 233 83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.in
·     Justice Shri H.L. Dattu, Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission of India,
Manav Adhikar Bhawan Block-C, GPO Complex, INA, New Delhi - 110023, India. Fax
+91 11 2465 1329. Email: covdnhrc@nic.in; ionhrc@nic.in
·     Mr. Srinivasa
Kammath, Focal Point on Human Rights Defenders, National Human Rights
Commission, Faridkot House, Copernicus Marg, New Delhi 110 001, India. Email: hrd-nhrc@nic.in
·     H.E. Mr. Ajit Kumar, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of India
to the United Nations (Geneva), Rue du Valais 9, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland. Fax:
+41 22 906 86 96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
·     Embassy of India in Brussels, 217 Chaussée de Vleurgat, 1050
Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 6489638 / +32 2 6451869
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of India in your respective
country.



[1] Ms.
Sori fights for the land rights of indigenous populations in the State of
Chhattisgarh, which are affected by the conflict between Maoists and government
security forces, and is committed to bring to justice high-ranking police
officials from Bastar district, allegedly involved in a case of extra-judicial
killing.


[2] The names of the other
members of the team are not disclosed for safety reasons.


[3] An
encounter is a euphemism used in India since the late 20th century to describe
killings by the police or the armed forces of suspected gangsters or terrorists
in gun battles. In a “fake encounter”, the police or armed forces kill the
suspects when they are either in custody or are unarmed, and then claim to have
shot them in self-defence. 


[4] On June
13, 2016, the Sukma police announced a successful encounter where an alleged
woman Maoist, Ms. Madkam Hidme, was killed in an encounter close to the village
of Gompad. However, according to villagers, Ms. Hidme was thrashing
paddy outside her hut when she was picked up by the security forces and taken to the nearby forest area. Villagers who heard her scream
ran in a group towards her. When the security forces saw the villagers, they
carried Ms. Hidme deeper inside the forest and threatened the villagers to go
back. Ms. Hidme’s dead body was subsequently handed over to the villagers.


[5] Camps are encampments set up by
security (paramilitary) forces, ostensibly there to fight insurgency, which
have residential quarters for the forces, as well as their offices. They
are positioned at regular distances along the main highway from Sukma to Konta.


[6] The Collector is the highest
civilian officer in the district, and is responsible for all civilian
functions.


[7] On June 22, 2016, Ms. Sori broke her
fast after she learned that the High Court of Chhattisgarh in Bilaspur had
passed an interim order the day before for exhumation of the deceased young
tribal woman and ordered a fresh post mortem, after Ms. Sori brought relatives
of the victim to the Court on June 18.


[8] After her
attack last February (see background information), Ms. Soni Sori was given
security guards for protection by the State. When Ms. Sori was denied
permission to travel further, her security guards were also not permitted to
proceed with her further. 