Egypt:  WHRDIC Statement: Prominent human rights organization pioneered by WHRDs faces threat of closure
March  7, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Egypt / 2016 / MarchEgypt: WHRDIC Statement: Prominent human rights organization pioneered by WHRDs faces threat of closure 
​The Women Human Rights Defenders International Coalition (WHRDIC), of which OMCT is a member, is a resource and advocacy network supporting women human rights defenders worldwide. El Nadeem Center for the Rehabilitation for Victims of
Violence and Torture is a prominent human rights organization which, since 1993, is providing
support to torture victims and families of those who were subject to enforced
disappearances in Egypt. Since 17th of February authorities in Egypt
delivered a closure order based on “breaching license conditions” and have launched a smear campaign against the
organization which has supported thousands of individuals and family members
confronting immeasurably traumatic experiences. 
On 17th of
February 2016, three men, an architect and two policemen, entered the premises
of El Nadeem Center and unduly and arbitrarily requested from Dr. Mona Hamed,
an Egyptian WHRD and the Director of the Clinic, to leave the office. The
lawyers negotiated the closure order and have extended it until 22 February
2016 to investigate the allegations brought against El Nadeem Center and
provide justifications to the Ministry of Health. 
The authorities in Egypt
further escalated the aggression towards the organization via disseminating
misleading information in an attempt to libel their meaningful contributions to
the advancement of human rights in Egypt for more than two decades. On 24th
of February 2016 the Ministry of Health released a statement discrediting the
organization, which was published in Shorouk newspaper as
well as in English on the Facebook page of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA). El Nadeem responded
to all false accusations via an announcement.
El Nadeem Center has not
only supported victims of torture and families of those who were subject to
enforced disappearances. The center is at the heart of the women’s rights
struggle in Egypt and is critical to fostering women’s rights in Egypt and the wider region.  The center was instrumental in
drafting a law to prevent and protect women from domestic violence and have
been advocating for its acceptance by the Parliament. El Nadeem has also issued
important publications on sexual violence in Egypt in an attempt to raise
awareness on gender-based violence in the country. 
The WHRD
Mena Coalition
has warned that the closure threat brought against the Center has wider
implications for WHRDs in the region. The Coalition has stressed that “As El Nadeem center is mostly run by pioneering WHRDs of Egypt who have
been on the frontline of pushing the gender agenda in the country, they have
inspired their fellow activists in the region. The closure of the center will
certainly send a message to the women rights movement in the region of
potential implications they might face by their government if they continue
their committed advocacy.”  
The WHRDIC strongly urges the government of Egypt to cease all acts of
harassment against the El Nadeem
Center for the Rehabilitation for Victims of Violence and Torture. The WHRD-IC stands in solidarity
with women human rights defenders in Egypt and the wider region, who continue
their meaningful human rights advocacy at the face of such gruesome threats and
restrictions.
 
Notes 
The Women Human Rights Defender International
Coalition is a resource and advocacy network supporting women human rights
defenders worldwide. We have 32 members including: 

Amnesty
International (AI) 
Asia
Pacific Forum on Women, Law and Development (APWLD)
Asian
Forum for Human Rights and Development (FORUM ASIA)
The
Association for Progressive Communications Women’s Networking Support Programme
(APC WNSP) 
Association
for Women’s Rights in Development (AWID)
BAOBAB
for Women’s Human Rights (BAOBAB)
Center
for Reproductive Rights (CRR) 
Center
for Women’s Global Leadership (CWGL) 
Coalition
of African Lesbians (CAL)
Frida
the Young Feminist Fund 
Front
Line Defenders 
Human
Rights First Information Monitor (INFORM) 
International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)
International
Service for Human Rights (ISHR) 
International
Women’s Rights Action Watch Asia Pacific (IWRAW-AP)
Isis
International ISIS Women’s International Cross-Cultural Exchange (ISIS-WICCE) 
Just
Associates (JASS) 
The
Latin American and Caribbean Committee for the Defense of Women’s Rights
(CLADEM)
MADRE 
Nazra
for Feminist Studies 
Nobel
Women’s Initiative (NWI) 
Peace
Brigades International Rainbow Rights Project (R-Rights)
Inc. Society
for Appraisal & Women Empowerment in Rural Areas (SAWERA) 
Urgent
Action Fund for Women’s Human Rights (UAF) 
Women
Living under Muslim Laws (WLUML) 
Women’s
Global Network for Reproductive Rights Women’s Initiatives for Gender Justice
(WIGJ) 
Women’s
Rehabilitation Centre (WOREC) 
World
Organisation against Torture (OMCT) 