Bahrain:  Harassment of lawyer. Mohamed Issa Al Tajer
June 14, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2012 / JuneBahrain: Harassment of lawyer. Mohamed Issa Al Tajer

URGENT APPEAL -
THE OBSERVATORY

New
Information
BHR
003 / 0411 / OBS 065.4
Harassment / Reprisals
Bahrain
June
 14, 2012
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
Bahrain.
 
New
Information:
The 
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing harassment 
faced by Mr. Mohamed Issa Al Tajer, a prominent human rights 
lawyer.
 
According 
to the information received, after Mr. Al Tajer participated in the Universal 
Periodic Review (UPR) of Bahrain 
in Geneva 
on May 
30, 2012, 
videos and pictures of himself and his wife were disseminated through 
pro-government forums as a type of reprisal.
 
Mr. 
Al Tajer had started to be blackmailed in January 2011, after intelligence 
agents had reportedly set up hidden cameras in his beach house. Since that date, 
they have continuously threatened to publish videos of him and his wife if he 
did not stop his human rights activities. 
 
The 
Observatory strongly denounces this breach of Mr. Al Tajer's right to privacy as 
it seems to constitute mere reprisals aiming at sanctioning his cooperation with 
the UN Human Rights Council (HRC). During the UPR of Bahrain, Ms. Laura Dupuy 
Lasserre, President of the HRC, made a landmark statement calling on the 
Bahraini authorities to put an end to any kind of intimidation or reprisals 
against human rights defenders who attended the UPR. She particularly urged the 
Bahraini authorities to guarantee the protection of human rights defenders she 
orally listed, including Mr. Al Tajer.
 
Furthermore, 
Mr. Al Tajer has been subjected for 14 months to judicial harassment that seems 
to merely aim at hindering his legitimate human rights activities as a defence 
lawyer. The Observatory has repeatedly condemned the lack of due process in the 
trial held against him over the past months (see background information). This 
trial is still ongoing and the next hearing is scheduled on June 
26, 2012. 

 
The Observatory recalls the judicial proceedings launched against Mr. Al 
Tajer took place within the context of an intensified crackdown against 
activists, including human rights defenders, who have supported or are alleged 
to have supported, the protest movement which started in Bahrain in February 
2011. Hundreds of individuals are still arbitrarily detained, and access to the 
majority of these detainees, including by their lawyers, is not guaranteed. 
Concerns about the physical integrity and life of those arrested are 
consequently high.
 
Background Information: 
 
On 
April 
15, 2011, 
a group of more than 20 masked and armed plain-clothes men arrested Mr. Al Tajer 
and took him to an unknown destination. Mr. Al Tajer was detained incommunicado 
for five weeks and was then allegedly transferred to the Gurain military 
prison
 
On 
June 
12, 2011, 
he was brought before the 
Lower 
National Safety Court (a military court) 
on charges of “spreading rumours and malicious news” and “incitement of hatred 
towards the regime” without his lawyer or his family being informed of the court 
hearing. Several lawyers who were in the court on that day requested the judge 
to represent him. Mr. Al Tajer pleaded not guilty.
 
On 
June 16, he was brought again before the National 
Safety Court 
for a hearing, and on June 
23, 2011, 
before the Lower National Safety Court of Manama on four charges[1]. 

 
The 
verdict in this trial was to be issued on July 
5, 2011, 
but on June 26, the authorities announced that all remaining court cases would 
be transferred from the special military courts to civilian courts. Thus, Mr. Al 
Tajer's trial was suspended and transferred to civilian courts. On 
August 
6, 2011, after 114 days of detentions, Mr. Mohamed Issa 
Al Tajer was released on bail. He was previously forced to sign documents 
stating that he would appear before courts and be available for interrogation at 
any time if summoned. He was also required to declare that he would not carry 
out “activities against the country.” 
 
During 
his detention, Mr. Al Tajer was allegedly subjected to acts of torture and 
ill-treatment. He was kept in solitary confinement during seven weeks, beaten 
and kicked, forced to stand for long hours with his hands against the wall, prevented from going to the 
bathroom, sleeping, talking with other detainees and having contact with his 
family during two consecutive months. None of those responsible have been 
prosecuted yet. In addition, items confiscated during the search that 
included confidential lawyer-client information, as well as family pictures and 
videos, have not been returned to him.
 
While 
on February 7, 2012, the Third Minor Criminal Court was due to resume the trial 
brought on the basis of charges of “spreading rumours and malicious news”, 
“incitement of hatred towards the regime” and “taking part in a demonstration” 
to hear defence witnesses. Due to the absence of the judge, the trial was 
postponed to March 
20, 2012.
 
Additionally, Mr. Al Tajer's telephone communications and movements are 
allegedly closely monitored by the National Security Intelligence, his clients 
have been put under pressure, and he is regularly accused of inciting 
sectarianism and of “treason” in on-line social forums, including Facebook and 
Twitter.
 
Actions 
requested:
The Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to: 

 
i.         
Guarantee 
the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Mohamed Issa Al Tajer and all 
human rights defenders in Bahrain; 
 
ii.       
Put 
an end to any acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Mr. 
Mohamed Issa Al Tajer and against all human rights defenders in Bahrain; 

 
iii.      
Carry 
out an effective, thorough and impartial investigation into the 
above-mentioned events, in order to identify all 
those responsible, bring them before a civil, competent and impartial tribunal 
and apply to them the penal sanctions provided by the law. 
iv.     
Conform 
in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly, 
in particular : its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, 
individually or in association with others, to promote the protection and 
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and 
international levels” ;
-          its 
Article 6 (c) which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in 
association with others to study, discuss, form and hold opinions on the 
observance, both in law and in practice, of all human rights and fundamental 
freedoms and, through these and other appropriate means, to draw public 
attention to those matters” ;
-          and 
its Article 12.2 which states that “the State shall take all necessary measures 
to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually 
and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de 
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action 
as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in 
the present Declaration”.
 
vi. 
   Ensure in all circumstances respect for 
human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human 
rights standards and international instruments ratified by Bahrain. 
Addresses:

·         
Cheikh 
Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 
587
·         
Cheikh 
Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tel: +973 172 27 555; 
Fax : +973 172 12 6032 
·         
Cheikh 
Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and Islamic Affairs, Tel: +973 
175 31 333; Fax: +973 175 31 284 
·         
Permanent 
Mission of Bahrain to the United Nations in Geneva, 1 chemin Jacques-Attenville, 
1218 Grand-Saconnex, CP 39, 1292 Chambésy, Switzerland. Fax: 
+ 41 22 758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch

 
Please 
also write to diplomatic representations of Bahrain in your respective 
countries.
 
*** 

Paris-Geneva, 
June 14, 2012 
 
Kindly 
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your 
reply.
 
The 
Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human 
Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need. 

 
To 
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·         
E-mail: 
Appeals@fidh-omct.org

·         
Tel 
and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
·        Tel 
and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1]              The charges were the following: 
“inciting others to develop hatred or hostility towards the system of 
Government” pursuant to Article 165 of the Bahraini Criminal Code; “deliberately 
releasing malicious news or rumours about (…) the State” pursuant to Article 
168; “inciting others (…) to hate or show contempt for a certain faction (…) 
undermining the public peace” pursuant to Article 172; and “taking part in a 
demonstration (…) with the aim of committing crimes (…) aimed at undermining 
public security” pursuant to Article 178 punishable by a prison sentence of up 
to three years. These charges were pressed 
against Mr. Al Tajer because 
of a speech he delivered in public in the Pearl Roundabout in March 2012 denouncing Bahrain's human rights record. In the charge 
sheet, the prosecution contended that such a speech jeopardised the country’s stability and security, and caused the public to reject the National Dialogue, 
which was then called for by the Government. 