Switzerland:  Press Release - Switzerland : OMCT welcomes the recent CERD's concluding observations
April  5, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Urgent Interventions / Switzerland / 2002 / AprilSwitzerland: Press Release - Switzerland : OMCT welcomes the recent CERD's concluding observationsPRESS RELEASE  Geneva 5 March 2002  The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) welcomes the recent United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination’s concluding observations concerning Switzerland, and stresses the need to urgently and adequately implement the recommendation issued by the committee towards the elimination of police abuse and excessive use of force against persons of foreign origin during arrest or in the course of deportations.  The United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination recently examined the report on the implementation of the convention on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination by the Government of Switzerland during its 60th session which took place in Geneva from 4 to 22 March 2002.  In its alternative report submitted to the CERD, OMCT intended to put emphasis on the causes and consequences of violence against vulnerable groups carried out on the basis of racial discrimination, in particular under the criminal justice system, and raised, in particular, the issues of racial discrimination and violence against foreigners and asylum seekers in Switzerland. OMCT deplores the fact that, since the recommendations made by the CERD in 1997, asylum seekers continue to face “persistence hostile attitudes” as stated by the Committee, which are, in certain circumstances, the source of excessive use of violence by law enforcement officers.  OMCT is deeply concerned by the manner in which deportations are carried out by police officers. The use of dangerous methods, in certain cantons, such as injection of sedatives and gags should be prohibited. Moreover, some of these methods, such as the handcuffing of refused asylum seekers, are disproportionate and create a phenomenon of criminalisation of asylum seekers. OMCT points out that the use of force should be proportionate to the aims pursued and in conformity with the relevant international human rights standards on the subject, and that all methods which might endanger the life, health and physical integrity of the deportee, should be prohibited.  In issuing its concluding observations, the CERD took up an important number of areas of major concern for OMCT, and in particular, expressed its concerns at the allegations of police abuse and excessive use of force against persons of foreign origin during arrest or in the course of deportations. The Committee notes that  “many cantons do not have independent mechanisms for investigation of complaints regarding violence and abuse by the police, and that sanctions against responsible officers have been rare”.  The Committee further recommended that “Switzerland should ensure that independent bodies with authority to investigate complaints against police officers are established in all cantons. Efforts should also be made to ensure recruitment of members of minority groups into the police, as well as sensitisation and training of police officers to issues of racial discrimination.”  OMCT hopes that Switzerland will publish and give due consideration to the recommendations of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination.     To obtain copies of the alternative report or for further information please contact Elsa Le Pennec at OMCT, tel. 809 4939, fax. 809 4929, e-mail: elp@omct.org 