Egypt:  AHRLA finally authorised to be officially re-registered!
October 28, 2008
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2008 / OctoberEgypt: AHRLA finally authorised to be officially re-registered![Arabic version in pdf]  Authorities should comply with the Court decision and remove all restrictions against AHRLA Copenhagen-Geneva-Paris, October 28, 2008. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), and the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN) welcome the decision by the Egyptian judiciary to allow the Association of Human Rights and Legal Aid (AHRLA) to continue its activities in Egypt. According to the information received, the Administrative Court in Egypt decided on October 26, 2008 to stop the implementation of the authorities’ order to dissolve and liquidate (AHRLA), a non-governmental organisation providing legal assistance to victims of torture. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders and the EMHRN recall that AHRLA was closed down in September 2007 following an order issued by the Ministry of Solidarity, alleging financial transgressions[1]. AHRLA appealed the Government’s decision to an administrative court, which was due to rule on October 21, 2007. The appeal procedure has been regularly delayed since then. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders and the EMHRN acknowledge this as a positive step towards freedom of association, and encourage the Egyptian judiciary to continue its efforts in this regard. However, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders and the EMHRN remain concerned about the situation of human rights defenders and their organisations in Egypt. The organisations call upon the Egyptian authorities to respect the judiciary decision by ensuring that AHRLA and its members are able to carry out their work without any interference, as well as to end all forms of harassment against human rights defenders in Egypt. More generally, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders and the EMHRN urge the Egyptian authorities to ensure that their legislation complies with international and regional human rights standards on freedom of association, including the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998. For further information, please contact: OMCT: Delphine Reculeau, + 41 22 809 49 39 FIDH: Karine Appy / Gael Grilhot, + 33 1 43 55 25 18 EMHRN: Marc Degli-Esposti, +45 32 64 17 16    [1] See Observatory Annual Report 2007. 