Azerbaijan:  Open letter of Sport For Rights to the PACE co-rapporteurs
May  8, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Azerbaijan / 2015 / MayAzerbaijan: Open letter of Sport For Rights to the PACE co-rapporteursPACE open letter3 pages / 180 KBLetter from the Sport for Rights Campaign, which OMCT is a member of, to the PACE co-rapporteurs on Azerbaijan. 'Sport
 for Rights' campaign has been established to raise the problem of political 
prisoners in the context of the forthcoming international sporting events
 to be hosted by Azerbaijan.Mr Pedro Agramunt
Mr Tadeusz Iwiński
8 May 2015
Dear Mr Agramunt
and Mr Iwiński,
We, the
undersigned organisations, are writing to you as supporters of the ‘Sport for
Rights’ campaign, which has been established to raise the problem of political
prisoners in the context of the forthcoming international sporting events to be
hosted by Azerbaijan. Against a backdrop of systematic state-sponsored
repression, these events will fail to reflect the spirit in which they were
established. The next major sporting event is the Baku European Games, developed
and regulated by the European Olympic Committees, scheduled for June 2015. A
policy shift by the Azerbaijani government towards an open society is urgently
required if these Games are to be a success. Moreover, the international
community should demand the immediate release of political prisoners. 
We are addressing
you as the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe’s co-rapporteurs for
the monitoring of Azerbaijan. During your visit to the country in March, you
had the chance to meet with some of the political detainees, including human
rights defender Rasul Jafarov.
Jafarov was sentenced on 16 April to six and a half years’ imprisonment. 
With respect to your statement from 17
April, in which you considered Jafarov’s sentence to be disproportionately long,
the undersigned NGOs wish to draw your attention to the fact that when it comes
to politically motivated trials, it is difficult to speak about the proportionality
of the penalty. As underscored by the European Court of Human Rights in its
judgment from May 2014 in the case of Mammadov v. Azerbaijan, politically
motivated arrests and accusations constitute a violation of Article 5 and Article
18 of the Convention.
Opening cases against human rights
defenders such as Jafarov, based on fabricated allegations, are examples of
Azerbaijan’s intentional actions in violation of the Convention. It is
difficult to speak about the proportionality of the sanctions, when bringing these
individuals to trial is in itself incompatible with the international obligations
undertaken by Azerbaijan. We appreciated your attention to this point in your
statement of 24 April on the verdict in the case of human rights lawyer Intigam
Aliyev.
In your statement on Jafarov’s case,
you noted that you “believe that the authorities on the appeal level will
undertake appropriate steps to provide fair, equal trial, maintaining the rule
of presumption of innocence, in respect of article 6 of the Convention”. We
wish to point out that the court of first instance has already failed to fulfil
its obligations to conduct a fair trial. Monitoring of Jafarov’s trial, carried
out by independent NGOs from across Europe, has revealed a series of grave
violations of Article 6 of the Convention. 
According to international
standards, the fact that the allegations against the activist were not specified
by the public prosecutor’s office significantly affected the equality of arms
in this case, and should not be accepted. Moreover, all of the alleged victims
of Jafarov’s activities testified that they had not suffered any losses, and therefore
did not want to be considered victims in the case against him. The national
court ignored this fact.
In addition, in the initial phase of
the trial, the activist was held in a metal cage, which made communication with
his lawyers and an effective defence impossible. The use of metal cages has
been recognised as inhuman and degrading treatment in many judgments of the European
Court of Human Rights. 
Similar violations could be observed in the trial of
the human rights lawyer Intigam Aliyev,
sentenced on 22 April 2015 for 7.5 years of prison. He has filed numerous cases
with the European Court of Human Rights and as leader of the Legal Education
Centre trained a whole generation of lawyers in Azerbaijan. He was awarded with
the Homo Homini Award in 2012. He was sentenced on the same charges as Rasul
Jafarov. 
Moreover, as a result of massive
repressions, well-known Azerbaijani human rights defender Emin Huseynov has been in hiding in the Embassy of Switzerland in
Baku for almost eight months. He sought shelter at the Embassy in order to
avoid imminent arrest on fabricated charges—an act of revenge by the regime in
response to his criticism of Azerbaijan’s poor human rights record in the
international arena. Emin faces charges
under three articles of the Criminal Code of Azerbaijan: articles 308 (abuse of
office), 213 (tax evasion) and 192 (illegal business).  
Hard-hitting
investigative journalist Khadija
Ismayilova has been thrown into jail on similarly fabricated charges –
embezzlement, illegal business, tax evasion, and abuse of power. She has been
in pre-trial detention since December 5 on a separate charge of inciting a man
to commit suicide. As reported by the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ), a
member of the Sport for Rights coalition, Azerbaijan is the leading jailer of
journalists in Europe and Central Asia with at least eight journalists in
prison. 
Another prominent
critic of the Azerbaijan regime, Leyla
Yunus, who called for a boycott of the European Games due to Baku’s
appalling human rights records, was arrested on 30
July 2014 on trumped-up charges of treason and other crimes. Her husband, Arif
Yunus, faced travel restrictions until he too was arrested on 5 August 2014, on
similar charges. Leyla, who has been denied necessary medical attention
since her arrest, is currently being held in a detention centre in Baku, just a
few miles from the arena where the European Games will soon take place. 
The Azerbaijani government’s acts of
repression against human rights defenders, as well as its regular violations of
its international obligations, deserve to be especially stigmatised. The international
community, including all of the institutions established for the purpose of
monitoring Azerbaijan’s democratic progress, should unambiguously condemn Rasul
Jafarov’s and Intigam Aliyev’s convictions and call on President Ilham Aliyev’s
administration to immediately release the arrested activists. We would expect
such a position from the Parliamentary Assembly’s co-rapporteurs on Azerbaijan.
We urge you to acknowledge the political reasons behind the sentencing of these
human rights defenders in Azerbaijan, and to call on the Azerbaijani
authorities to release all jailed human rights defenders. 
Sincerely yours,
Thomas Hughes,
Executive Director, ARTICLE 19
Mark Fodor, Executive
Director, CEE Bankwatch Network
Danuta Przywara,
Director, Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights
Petra Havlikova, Project Coordinator of the Women’s
Rights Are Human Rights Program, NESENHUTÍ
Berit Lindeman,
Head of Communication/Senior Advisor, Norwegian Helsinki Committee
Adela
Pospichalova, Media Coordinator, People In Need
Emma Hughes,
Strategy Director, Platform
Jan Bazyl,
Executive Director, Zagranica Group: Polish NGDO Platform 