Philippines: Open Letter concerning the killing of a Human Rights defender, Mr Rashid Manahan
August 26, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2004 / AugustPhilippines: Philippines: Open Letter concerning the killing of a Human Rights defender, Mr Rashid ManahanOpen Letter To:  Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal Arroyo President of the Philippines   Paris-Geneva,  August 26, 2004  Your Excellency,The Observatory for the Protection of human Rights defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), express its deepest concern about the killing of Mr Rashid Manahan on August 24, 2004, in the Philippines.  Mr Rashid Manahan was the coordinator of Mamamayang Tutol sa Bitay (MTB-Davao / Movement for Restorative Justice), a newly established Philippine network of NGOs and human rights institutions involved in the struggle for the abolition of the death penalty.  The Observatory has been informed by Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP) that Mr Rashid Manahan has been killed in front of Ponce Suites, Bajada, Davao City, while he was on his way to attend a forum against the death penalty and salvaging at UP (University of the Philippines) Mindanao.  The Observatory calls upon the Philippine authorities to order an immediate investigation into the killing of Mr Rashid Manahan, identify those responsible, and bring them before an independent and impartial tribunal.  The Observatory recalls that in February 2004, two other human rights defenders were killed. Mrs. Juvy Magsino, a human rights lawyer and the Chairperson of Mindoro for Justice and Peace and Vice Mayor of Naujan, in Mindoro Oriental, and Mrs. Leima Fortu, a volunteer at Mindoro for Justice and Peace and the Acting Secretary General of the Alliance for Advancement of People's Rights (KARAPATAN), in Mindoro Oriental in Philippines, were shot dead by two unidentified men on a motorcycle without a license plate.   The Observatory would also like to draw attention to the death of yet two other human rights defenders in April 2003. Eden Marcellana, Secretary general of the Tagalog-South office of KARAPATAN, and Eddie Gumanoy, President of the KASAMA-TK peasant group, were found dead shortly after being kidnapped when they were investigating human rights violations committed in the eastern province of Mindoro. The presumed authors of these assassinations are armed men acting with the support of the 204th infantry brigade of the army of the Philippines, commanded by Colonel Jovito Palparan Jr. To date, the killers of Marcellana and Gumanoy have not been brought to justice, in spite of an express request by the UN Human Rights Committee in December 2003.  We urge you to ensure that the Philippines conform to the provisions of the UN Declaration on Humans Rights defenders of December 9, 1998, in particular article 12.2 which provides that "the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually or in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto o de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration."  Hoping that you will take these considerations and requests into account, we remain,    Sidiki Kaba 	 President of the FIDH 	   Eric Sottas Director of the OMCT  Click here for PDF version of this article. 