UN Forum on Business and Human Rights: Side event on challenges that human rights defenders face in the context of business activities in an age of a shrinking civil society space
November 17, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Events / 2015 / NovemberUN Forum on Business and Human Rights: Side event on challenges that human rights defenders face in the context of business activities in an age of a shrinking civil society spaceConcept Note_HRD event2 pages / 490 KB​Wednesday 18 November 
10:00 to 11:20 - Room XX (Building E)Addressing the challenges Human
Rights Defenders face in the context of business activities in an age of
shrinking civil society space
There is a growing clampdown worldwide against human rights defenders
who challenge specific economic paradigms, the presence of corporations and
harmful business conduct. Too often, Governments detain human rights defenders,
prevent them from raising funds, restrict their movements, place them under
surveillance and, in some cases, authorize their torture and murder. Meanwhile,
many companies either stand by as Governments employ tough law and order
responses against defenders, or they aggressively target defenders who
challenge their activities through legal or other means.

Against this bleak backdrop, a number of progressive companies recognize
the need and value in communicating effectively with communities affected by
their projects. Without a social license to operate, companies face many
problems that can affect their operations, increase a project’s costs and
success and it can harm the firm’s overall reputation. The freedom human rights
defenders enjoy plays an essential role in ensuring the legitimacy of a
company’s operations. An open, secure civic space enables defenders to build
inclusive, stable societies characterised by the rule of law that contribute to
a favourable investment climate and operating conditions for companies.
This session will explore how to overcome the risks that defenders, who
challenge business conduct, face in a world in which civil society at large
fights for its place. It will showcase the experiences of prominent defenders
and companies operating in complex environments. It will include contributions
from Governments who are working to improve the rights of defenders. It will
provide examples of what companies can
do to provide meaningful, practical assistance to defenders, as well as the
role that they can play in promoting laws, policies and action that supports
civic space. Participants will also discuss what defenders and civil society can
do to engage constructively with businesses to improve respect for human rights
and what Governments need to do to allow peaceful dissent and fulfil their primary
obligation to protect human rights. 
Some key topics to
be addressed by the speakers: 
·      
The types of challenges that human rights defenders face in
their work, as well as the physical, legal and financial risks to themselves.
·      
How State action restricts
the work of defenders, and how certain corporate conduct facilitates this.
·       What the shrinking civil society space, including the work of
defenders, means for those operating in certain countries and regions,
including business.
·      
Identifying the steps that
companies can take to engage meaningfully with defenders and communities to
reduce conflict and vice versa. Why this is in all their best interest.
·      
What Governments must do to create the right
conditions for companies to gain a social license.
·      
The importance of international
standards to restrain harmful State actions and how international civil society
can help.
Moderator: 
Salil Tripathi - Senior Adviser, Global Issues, the
Institute for Human Rights and Business
Panel:
-       
Alfred Brownell - President
and Founder of the Association of Environmental Lawyers of Liberia 
-       
Andy Hall
- Human rights defender and a migrant worker specialist (based in Thailand)
-       
Dan Bross
- Microsoft's Senior Director of Corporate Citizenship and Executive Director
of the Microsoft Technology and Human Rights Center
-       
Nicky
Black - Head of Social Performance, De Beers
-       
Riccardo
Serri - Deputy Head of Human Rights Strategy and Policy Implementation,
European External Action Service (EU)
-        Geneviève Paul - Head of Globalisation and Human Rights Desk, International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)Co-organisers:
-       
Amnesty International
-       
Business and Human Rights Resource Centre
-       
Civil Rights Defenders
-       
Front Line Defenders
-       
Institute for Human Rights and Business
-       
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)
– Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders programme
-       
International Service for Human Rights
-       
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) –
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders programme
-       
UN Working Group on Business and Human
Rights
 
Forum Twitter hashtag: #bizhumanrightsWatch live: http://webtv.un.org/ 