Israel:  Draft bill exempting security services from the obligation to record interrogations
April  2, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2012 / AprilIsrael: Draft bill exempting security services from the obligation to record interrogations Israel_0204122 pages / 54 KB​OPEN LETTER TO Mr. BENJAMIN
NETANYAHUPRIME MINISTER OF ISRAEL
Via Fax: +972- 2-651 2631 
Email: pm_eng@pmo.gov.il
Geneva, 2 April 2012
Re: Draft bill exempting security services from the
obligation to record interrogations 
Your
Excellency, 
The World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), the leading global network of civil society organisations against
torture, summary executions, enforced disappearances and all other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in the world is writing to you expressing
its grave concern over a draft bill presently under consideration that would permanently
exempt the police from the obligation to record interrogations of suspects in
cases involving security violations[1]. OMCT has been informed
that the Ministerial Committee for Legislation has decided to support the draft
bill.  
In our global experience working on the
prevention of torture and ill-treatment recording of interrogations can constitute
a fundamental safeguard against torture and ill-treatment. Such safeguards are even
more important in ensuring respect for the absolute prohibition of torture and
other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment in national security interrogations
where the temptation to resort to unlawful means is generally higher than in
ordinary cases.
In the face of the credible accounts
against the Israeli Security Agency (ISA) and the police resorting to methods
amounting to torture and/or ill-treatment in the interrogation process, the
proposed bill further lowers the bar creating a legal framework prone to
torture and ill-treatment. Rather than weakening, we urge you to reinforce the
framework of legal safeguards against torture and ill-treatment in the context
of security investigations, to oblige both police and ISA to fully record their
interrogations and to ensure fully independent and effective investigations
into any allegation of torture and ill-treatment.
OMCT recalls that in May 2009 following
the examination of Israel’s report, the UN Committee Against
Torture stated that “video recording of interrogations is an important advance
in protection of both the detainee and, for that matter, law enforcement
personnel.” It had therefore recommended to Israel “as a matter of priority, to extend
the legal requirement of video recording of interviews of detainees accused of
security offenses as a further means to prevent torture and ill-treatment”. 
Indeed, an important advance in the
protection of suspects from torture and ill-treatment was set by the Criminal
Procedure (Interrogating Suspects) Law, 2002, which requires that all stages of
a suspect’s interrogation by the police in a case of felony be recorded by
video and audio[2].
However, this requirement has never applied to ISA, and while it was supposed
to come into effect with respect to police interrogations of suspects in
security cases in 2008, the Knesset amended the Law by exempting police from
such recording until 2012[3]. The proposed draft bill
would make this exemption a permanent feature of the law. 
OMCT recalls that the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment requires that each State Party shall
take effective legislative, administrative, judicial or other measures to
prevent acts of torture in any territory under its jurisdiction (Article 2 a))
and that each State Party shall keep under systematic review interrogation
rules, instructions, methods and practices as well as arrangements for the
custody and treatment of persons subjected to any form of arrest, detention or
imprisonment in any territory under its jurisdiction, with a view to preventing
any cases of torture (Article 11). 
OMCT is of the opinion that video and audio recordings of police and ISA
interrogations can contribute substantially to deterring police and security
services from violence, intimidation and humiliating treatment while
questioning persons suspected of serious criminal offences. The recordings can
also ensure that an accused who claims that his confessions were obtained
through the use of torture and ill-treatment will have the means to prove his
or her claim and prevent the admissibility of such confessions. Ultimately, it
ensures that the fight against security threats is conducted within and not
outside the rule of law.
Accordingly, OMCT respectfully urges Your
Excellency to reject the proposed draft bill that would permanently exempt the
police and the ISA to record interrogations of suspects in cases involving
security violations and to fully ensure safeguards against torture and
ill-treatment in all security interrogations.  
We hope that the
concerns expressed in this letter will receive the attention they deserve and
we would welcome your prompt responses on these matters. 
Yours sincerely 
Gerald
Staberock
Secretary
General
OMCT
Copies to 
- Yitzhak Aharonovitch, Minister of Public Security, Via Email: sar@mops.gov.il
- Prof. Yaakov Neeman,
Minister of Justice, Via Fax: +972
2 628 7757, +972 2 628 8618, +972 2-646 6357, +972-2-6285438, and Via Email: sar@justice.gov.il 



[1] Draft Bill: Criminal Procedure Law
(Interrogation of Suspects) (Amendment – Interrogation of Suspects of Security
Offences). 


[2] The recording requirement applies to all investigations of
felonies in which the maximum penalty is ten years imprisonment or more. The
requirement came into force incrementally, beginning with murder investigations
in 2006, and applied to all investigations of felonies of 10 years maximum
imprisonment or more in 2010.


[3] PCATI and OMCT
report « Implementation of the UN Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment by Israel », June 2009. 