Malaysia:  25th Session of the Human Rights Council: Joint oral statement delivered under Malaysia's UPR
March 20, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Statements / Malaysia / 2014 / MarchMalaysia: 25th Session of the Human Rights Council: Joint oral statement delivered under Malaysia's UPRJoint statement1 page / 80 KB
Please check against
delivery
HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL
25th session (3-28 March 2014)
Item
6: UPR Malaysia 
Oral
statement delivered by The World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT),
a non-governmental
organisation in general consultative status in conjunction with Suaram
Thank you Mr. President, 
OMCT and its member
organisation in Malaysia, Suaram, also a member of COMANGO, welcome the recommendations
made by States to Malaysia, particularly those calling for the prohibition of
corporal punishment; the enactment of anti-torture law; the setting up of
independent police oversight mechanism; the abolishment of the death penalty;
and the ratification of major human rights treaties. However,
we deeply regret that Malaysia has rejected most of these recommendations. 
Indeed, we deplore
that Malaysia has failed to this date to ratify core international human rights
instruments such as the UN Convention against Torture and the ICCPR, revealing
that the government tolerates a culture of torture and impunity.
Malaysian police routinely inflict torture
or other forms of ill-treatment during arrest, detention or when responding to
protests. Since 2009 to August 2013, there have been 124 people shot dead by
police. In 2013 alone, Suaram documented 12 cases of suspicious deaths in
custody. Malaysia has so far failed to address most of these violations,
sending the message that police are above the law and will be able to get away
with torture or murder. Both organisations recall that the Enforcement Agencies
Integrity Commission (EAIC) lacks prosecuting powers, independence and
effectiveness. It received 347 complaints between 2011-2012 but only three cases
were fully investigated, with only one disciplinary action and two warnings
handed down. In this regard,
we urge Malaysia to promptly establish the Independent Police Complaint and
Misconduct Commission as recommended by the Royal Commission of Inquiry in
2005. 
The risk of torture and ill-treatment is
further exacerbated by Malaysia’s legal framework allowing for incommunicado
detention without charge or judicial review, such as the Security Offences Act
(SOSMA), the Prevention of Crime Act (POCA) and the Dangerous Drugs Act. OMCT and Suaram call on Malaysia to
withdraw the aforementioned legislation. 
Whipping or canning remains a widespread
form of punishment to prisoners, including asylum seekers and migrants. We are
deeply concerned that Malaysia understands corporal punishment as “a valid and
legal form of punishment” that does not “equate to torture, cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment and punishment”, which runs in direct contradiction with
the international understanding of corporal punishment as a form of inhumane
and ill-treatment.  
The death
penalty, which constitutes cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, continues to
be used. There are currently about 900 death row prisoners. There have been at
least two attempts of execution so far in 2014, but the executions were stayed.
OMCT and Suaram welcome the stay of execution and urge Malaysia to take immediate steps towards the abolition of the death
penalty for all offences by declaring an official moratorium on all executions,
and commute all death sentences to prison terms. 
Finally, OMCT and Suaram urge Malaysia to seize this
second UPR to show its commitment to improve its compliance with human rights
standards and the abolition of torture and other forms of ill-treatment. 
We thank you. 