Turkey:  Arrest of human rights defender Osman Isci
June 26, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2012 / JuneTurkey: Arrest of human rights defender Osman Isci
 
 
JOINT PRESS RELEASE
TURKEY: Human rights defender Osman Işçi
must be immediately released
 
Copenhagen, Paris, Geneva, 25 June
 2012
The Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network
(EMHRN) and the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the
World Organisation against Torture (OMCT), express their deepest concern
regarding the arbitrary arrest and detention of Mr. Osman Işçi, as well as the
issuing of arrest warrants against 72 trade unionists.
According to the information received, Mr. Osman Işçi,
member of the Human Rights Association (İHD), and EMHRN Executive Committee
member, was arrested at his home in the Ankara Province in the
morning of 25 June 2012 by the
anti-terrorist police forces, and brought to the Security Directorate in Ankara. Police
officers said his arrest was part of vast anti-terrorist operations intended to
dismantle an alleged terrorist network - the Kurdish Communities Union (KCK) -
an organisation said by the authorities to be the “urban branch” of the armed
Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK). These operations that started in 2009 have in
fact been targeting mostly peaceful Kurdish and pro-Kurdish activists. 
It is also reported that 56 trade unionists
have also been detained, of which 3 were released by the police for health reasons. 53 currently remain in custody and other 2 people are being sought by the
police for questioning.
Police teams have been raiding the homes of 71 members of trade unions, as well as the
headquarters of KESK, the Egitim-Sen (Education and Science Worker's Union),
SES (The Trade Union of Public Employees in Health and Social Services), BTS
(United Trade Union of Transport Employees) and other branches of these trade
unions in Ankara,
Diyarbakır, İstanbul, Ağrı, Bitlis, Siirt, Adana, Eskişehir Provinces. 
Mr. Işçi is a well-known human
rights activist and has focused in particular on minority rights and freedom of
association and expression. He is also a member of a trade union affiliated to
the KESK. 
Mr. Işçi and the other activists are
expected to be presented before the public prosecutor on 27 or 28 June. The
prosecutor will then decide to release them or to keep them in detention,
pending the end of the investigation. 
Our organisations denounce the continuing
policy of arbitrary detention and judicial harassment targeting human rights
defenders in Turkey, particularly İHD members, members
of trade unions, lawyers and journalists, who have been involved in advocating
for a peaceful resolution of the Kurdish issue.
We recall that 12 other İHD members have long been suffering judicial
harassment and are currently in pre-trial detention: Messrs. Muharrem Erbey
and Arslan Özdemir, Diyarbakır Branch Executives; Messrs. Şerif Süren
and Orhan Çiçek, Aydın Branch Executives; Ms. Zana Aksu, Messrs. Reşit Teymur and
Muhsin Beydoğan, Siirt Branch Executives; Mr. Abdulkadir Çurğatay and Ms. Veysi Parıltı, Mardin Branch Executives; Doğubeyazıt Representative Şaziye Önder,
Muş former Branch Chairperson Mensur Işık and Malatya Executive Hikmet
Kapancı. 
 
Our
organisations urge the authorities to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological
integrity of Mr. Osman Işçi, as well as all other human rights defenders
detained;
 
ii. Release Mr. Osman Işçi, as well as all other human rights defenders,
immediately and unconditionally since their detention is arbitrary as it only
aims at sanctioning their human rights activities;
 
iii. Put an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial
level, against Mr. Osman Işçi, as well as against all other members of İHD and trade unions and, more generally,
all human rights defenders in Turkey;
 
iv. Comply with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, especially its Article 1, which states that “everyone
has the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to
strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms at the national and international levels”, as well as Article 12.2,
which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
present Declaration”;
 
v. More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international and regional
human rights instruments ratified by Turkey.
 
 
Contacts: 
EMHRN: Hayet Zeghiche: +32 2 503 06 86 
FIDH: Karine Appy / Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25
18
OMCT: Isabelle Scherer: + 41 22 809 49 39 