Colombia:  On the third anniversary of the detention of renowned Colombian human rights defender David Ravelo Crespo, International organisations express concern
September 13, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Colombia / 2013 / SeptemberColombia: On the third anniversary of the detention of renowned Colombian human rights defender David Ravelo Crespo, International organisations express concernOn the third anniversary of the detention of renowned Colombian human rights defender David Ravelo Crespo, International organisations express concern3 pages / 372 KB

14 September 2013 marks three years since
renowned human rights defender David Ravelo Crespo, member of the director’s
board of the Regional Corporation for the Defense of Human Rights (CREDHOS)
based in the city of Barrancabermeja (Colombia), was detained.  As International
NGOs and networks, we would like to reiterate concerns regarding a
series of irregularities that were reported throughout the proceedings which resulted in his
conviction and sentencing to 220 months in prison.
 
Reiterating our upmost respect for the
independence of the judiciary in Colombia, we believe that it is of fundamental
importance that national and international guarantees relating to due process
and the right to a fair trial are respected. In this regard, we again wish to
highlight a series of irregularities that were reported during the trial
against Mr. Ravelo Crespo.
 
According to the
defence lawyers, these irregularities have undermined the defence of Mr. Ravelo
Crespo and the integrity of the subsequent conviction. Among these irregularities, lawyers
denounce the legitimacy of the prosecutor who led the investigation: Prosecutor
William Pacheco Granados, from the Prosecutor’s Office no. 22 of the National
Counter Terrorism Unit. Mr Pacheco Granados was previously a lieutenant in the National
Police in Armenia (Quindío, Colombia) and was investigated by the Inspector´s General Office (Procuraduría)[1] He was subsequently
removed from his post by this authority as a result of his alleged involvement
in the disappearance of William Hurtado Parra in Armenia in 1991.[2] In November 1993, Mr
Pacheco Granados was sentenced to one year in prison by a military court.
According to Colombian law, this disqualifies him from the exercise of any
future employment in the prosecution service. On 23 April 2013, a criminal complaint
was filed against him for his involvement in this case of enforced
disappearance. In July 2013, Mr Pacheco Granados resigned; however, the
Attorney General has still not ruled on the issue of his disqualification.
 
On 4 September 2013, the Bar Human Rights
Committee of the Bar of England and Wales (BHRC) presented an Amicus Curiae[3] in the case of David
Ravel Crespo before the Superior Court of Santander (Colombia). The Amicus was
endorsed by the Human Rights Committee of the Law Society, the Colombian
Caravana UK Lawyers Groups, the Chartered Institute of Legal Executives and
other lawyers with an interest in the human rights situation in Colombia. As
stated by Kirsty Brimelow QC, president of the BHRC, “the problems in this case affect not only David Ravelo, but also the
working of due process in Colombia and its compliance with international law,
which serves to assist in the administration of justice”.
 
Since Mr. Ravelo Crespo has been detained,
national and international bodies have highlighted his case and the lack of
compliance with national and international standards of due process. In
March 2011, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Independence of Judges
and Lawyers, Gabriela Knaul, and the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of
Human Rights Defenders, Margaret Sekaggya, sent a combined communiqué to the
Colombian Government in response to the detention of Mr. Ravelo Crespo. In
this communiqué they expressed their concern that the “criminalisation of David Ravelo occurs in the context of increasing
prosecutions against human rights defenders in Colombia”.[4] We also recall that during the 22nd session
of the UN Human Rights Council, a resolution was adopted without veto urging
States to ensure greater protection of human rights defenders and to, above all,
end the use and abuse of national legislation to criminalise the activities of
human rights defenders, limit their access to international funding or limit their
rights to freedom of expression or assembly.
 
David Ravelo Crespo is an internationally
renowned human rights defender. He has won several awards such as the San Pedro
Claver Award from the Diocese of Barrancabermeja in 2009 and was one of the six
finalists for the 2013 Front Line Defenders Award for human rights defenders.[5] Furthermore, in 2013 he has been
nominated for the National Human Rights Defenders Awards in Colombia and
CREDHOS has been nominated for the 2013 Human Rights Award for the city of
Weimar (Germany).
 
In light of the above, the
undersigned International NGOs and networks request:
 
- That the international community speaks
out against violations of national and international standards of due process
and the right to fair trial. In this regard, we also request that cases of
criminalisation and judicial harassment of human rights defenders are closely
monitored to guarantee that they are not used merely to sanction activities in
defense of human rights.
 
- That the Colombian State and the
Attorney General's Office take all necessary measures to ensure compliance with
Colombian law. Specifically in this case, that the measures outlined in Law
270/1996, Law 938/2004 and Decree 261/2000 relating to ’Special Incapacity’ are
implemented, whereby no one shall be appointed to or hold office in the
Attorney General's Office who has been removed from any public office, as has
been the case with Mr William Pacheco Granados.
 
Signed:
 
-       
ABColombia
-       
Colombia
Caravana UK Lawyers Group
-       
Colombia
Solidarity Campaign
-       
Cooperacció
-       
Dialogo
Inter-Agencial en Colombia - DIAL
-       
Front Line Defenders
-       
Iniciativa Solidaria Internacionalista
-       
Justice for Colombia
-       
Justicia por Colombia
-       
Kolko – Derechos Humanos por Colombia
-      
Law
Society of England & Wales Human Rights Committee
-      
MISEREOR
-       
Observatorio para la Protección de los Defensores de Derechos Humanos
(Organización Mundial contra la Tortura – OMCT y Federación Internacional para
los Derechos Humanos – FIDH)
-       
Oficina Internacional de Derechos Humanos Acción Colombia – OIDHACO
-       
Peace Brigades International – PBI – Proyecto Colombia
-       
Plataforma por la Paz y los Derechos Humanos en Colombia
-       
Protection International
-       
Solicitors’ International Human Rights Group 
-       
Taula Catalana  per la Pau i el Drets
Humans a Colòmbia
-       
United Steelworkers – USW
-       
United Church of Christ Justice and Witness Ministries

-       
US Office on Colombia – USOC
-       
War on Want
-       
WOLA
 


[1] Autonomous body which controls and monitors the public function of state
employees


[2] The Inspector General´s Human Rights
Delegate: Resolution 15 of 10 July 1992, Resolution 017 of 22 November 1993 and Resolution
2117 of 15 March 1994.


[3] An amicus curiae (literally "friend of the
court") refers to presentations made by an unrelated third party  regarding some point of law or other
related matter in order to assist in the resolution of the matter before the
court. 
 


[4] UN General Assembly Human Rights Council, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the
Independence of Judges and Lawyers, Gabriela Knaul, A/HRC/17/30/Add.1, May
2011


[5] Front Line Defenders
Award 2013 