Joint Open letter on the European Union position on Azerbaijan
April 27, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Azerbaijan / 2015 / AprilJoint Open letter on the European Union position on AzerbaijanJoint letter AZ3 pages / 241 KBBrussels, 
27 April 2015 
Joint Open letter on the European 
Union position on Azerbaijan
 
 Dear High Representative/Vice-President, 
 
We the undersigned Non-Governmental Organisations wish to express our 
deepest disappointment with regards to the weak positioning of the European 
External Action Service in reaction to the two recent convictions of human 
rights defenders Mr. Rasul Jafarov and Mr. Intigam Aliyev.
 
On 16 April, the Baku Grave Crimes Court handed down a six and a half year 
jail sentence to Mr. Rasul Jafarov. Mr. Jafarov actively participated in the 
“Sing for Democracy” and the “Art for Democracy” movements ahead of the 
Eurovision song contest in Baku in May 2012, and was planning a campaign called 
“Sports for Human Rights” prior to the European Olympic Games which will take 
place in Baku in June 2015. Mr. Jafarov has been arbitrarily detained since 
August 2014 on multiple charges[1]. The sham trial against this human rights 
defender was based on trumped-up charges, lacked openness and transparency. 
International trial observers repeatedly noted that no evidence of Mr. Jafarov’s 
guilt was presented during the proceedings. The “victims” testified that they 
incurred no prejudice and denied considering themselves as victims.
 
Mr. Jafarov was also heading the “Human Rights Club” established in 
December 2010. Despite repeated attempts to register his NGO with the Azeri 
government, registration was repeatedly refused by the authorities. Constant 
refusal to register NGOs that are critical of the regime is a commonly used 
method of repression by the Azeri authorities. Unregistered organisations are 
barred from opening a bank account, working and receiving funding legally. Thus, 
any funding is considered as the NGO leaders' personal and any NGO activity is 
seen as illegal entrepreneurship. The authorities use this very convenient 
repressive legal framework to prosecute activists and human rights defenders for 
tax evasion and thus silence critical voices.
 
On 22 April, another prominent human rights defender and renowned lawyer, 
Mr. Intigam Aliyev, was sentenced to seven and a half year of prison. Mr. Aliyev 
was arrested on 8 August 2014 and subsequently charged with illegal 
entrepreneurship, tax evasion, service forgery, misappropriation and abuse of 
office. Mr. Intigam Aliyev represented several dozens of applicants before the 
European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg. He has been awarded the Homo 
Homini Award by the Czech human rights organisation People in Need and Andrei 
Sakharov’s Freedom Award by the Norwegian Helsinki Committee.
 
The trial of Mr. Intigam Aliyev was marred with severe and continued 
violations as documented[2] by the international observers present at the 
hearings. The small size of the court room at the initial hearings did not allow 
international observers, NGOs and representatives of foreign embassies to 
attend. Mr. Aliyev was transferred to the court room in handcuffs and he was 
held in a metal cage during the proceedings. Court dismissed several motions by 
the defense, including replacing pre-trial detention with house arrest or 
releasing him on bail. The decision on the motion submitted by the defense for 
the 10 March 2015 hearing to release 101 documents seized by the police was 
postponed for “further consideration”. These documents, among others, contain 
evidence that Mr. Intigam Aliyev did register the grants he received with the 
Azerbaijan Ministry of Justice.
 
A few weeks before the May Eastern Partnership Riga Summit and the June 
European Olympic Games in Baku, these sentences epitomize the endless cycle of 
repression underway in Azerbaijan. It is characterised by the suffocation of the 
independent civil society and media through systematic harassment and account 
freezing and the continuing arbitrarily detention of other human rights 
defenders, including Leyla Yunus, Arif Yunusov, Khadija Ismayilova, Anar 
Mammadli, Hilal Mammadov and Rauf Mirqadirov. On 1st April, Council of Europe 
Commissioner for Human Rights Nils Muižnieks stressed that the Rasul Jafarov 
case was part of “a clear pattern of repression in Azerbaijan against those 
expressing dissent or criticism of the authorities”[3].
 
In this context, our organisations express their profound disappointment 
with the mild reactions of the European External Action Service following Mr. 
Jafarov's and Mr. Aliev's condemnations. On 16 April, the Statement by the 
Spokesperson of the High Representative/Vice-President referred to the 
conviction of Mr. Jafarov as “disproportionate”, and it merely expressed the 
hope that the authorities “ensure that Rasul Jafarov is given the opportunity to 
appeal this verdict in a fair and unbiased process”[4]. On 24 April, the 
Spokesperson issued a very similar Statement concerning Mr. Aliev's 
conviction.
 
The weakness of the EU position is all the more obvious as the US 
Department of State Statement clearly urged in two distinct Statements the 
Azerbaijan authorities to “release [Mr. Jafarov/Mr. Aliyev] and others 
incarcerated in connection with exercising their fundamental freedoms”[5 
6].
 
Our organisations believe that a weak EU positioning, by associating the 
concept of proportionality with a clearly iniquitous trial, and by failing to 
call for the immediate release of persons who should never have been prosecuted, 
serves to comfort rather than deter the policy of repression in 
Azerbaijan.
 
Our organisations call on the European Union and its Member States 
to:
-- adopt a public positioning clearly requesting the immediate and 
unconditional release of all arbitrary imprisoned human rights defenders and 
journalists, including Mr. Jafarov and Mr. Aliyev.
-- condition discussions on the future Strategic Modernization 
Partnership with Azerbaijan and sectoral discussions on energy to the release of 
these persons and an end to the systematic harassment on the civil society and 
the media.
-- urge the Azeri authorities to amend 'Law on NGOs' in line with the 
Venice Commission's December 2014 recommendations and allow free and unfettered 
working environment for civil society organisations.
-- condition high level participation to the opening ceremony of the 
European Olympic Games to the release of the above mentioned human rights 
defenders and journalists and to the end of the harassment of civil society and 
the media.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1 The charges he has been accused of are illegal entrepreneurship 
(Article 192 of the Criminal Code), tax evasion (Article 213) and abuse of 
office (Article 308). On 12 December 2015, after the extension of his time in 
detention by three months on 23 October 2015, additional charges were brought 
against him under Articles 179.3.2 (embezzlement allegedly causing damage to 
third parties) and 313 (forgery)
 
2Joint Monitoring Report of the International Partnership for Human Rights 
and The Netherlands Helsinki Committee 
http://www.iphronline.org/fair-trial-for-azerbaijans-prisoners-of-conscience-20150323.html
 3He further indicated that “reprisals should immediately stop and 
all persons who are in detention because of their views expressed or legitimate 
civic activity should be released”. 
Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights, Third party intervention 
by the Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights under Article 36, 
paragraph 3, of the European Convention on Human Rights. Application no. 
69981/14 - Rasul JAFAROV v. Azerbaijan, CommDH(2015)8 01 April 2015, 
https://wcd.coe.int/ViewDoc.jsp?Ref=CommDH%282015%298&Language=lanEnglish
 
4 Statement by the Spokesperson on the sentencing of Rasul Jafarov, a 
prominent Human Rights Defender in Azerbaijan, Brussels, 16 April 2015, 
http://eeas.europa.eu/statements-eeas/2015/150416_05_en.htm
 
5 Press Statement, Marie Harf, Acting Department Spokesperson, Office of 
the Spokesperson, Conviction of Azerbaijani Human Rights Activist Rasul Jafarov, 
Washington, DC, April 16, 2015, 
http://www.state.gov/r/pa/prs/ps/2015/04/240765.htm
 6 Press Statement, Marie Harf, Acting Department Spokesperson, 
Office of the Spokesperson, Conviction of Azerbaijani Human Rights Lawyer 
Intigam Aliyev, Washington, DC, April 23, 2015, 
http://www.state.gov/r/pa/prs/ps/2015/04/241054.htm 