Iran:  Press Release: The Observatory strongly condemns arbitrary arrest of Ms. Nargess Mohammadi
May  5, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Iran / 2015 / MayIran: Press Release: The Observatory strongly condemns arbitrary arrest of Ms. Nargess MohammadiIran PR2 pages / 137 KBIRAN: The Observatory strongly 
condemns arbitrary arrest of Ms. Nargess 
Mohammadi
Paris-Geneva, May 5, 2015. 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), strongly 
condemns
today's 
arrest
of
human rights defender Ms. 
Nargess Mohammadi in Iran.
Ms. Nargess Mohammadi, 
Spokesperson and Vice-President of the Defenders of Human Rights Centre (DHRC), 
was arrested in the early morning of May 5, 2015, when state security agents 
showed up at her home and threatened to break in. Upon her arrest, the agents 
claimed that she was being taken “to serve her prison sentence”. The Observatory 
recalls that Ms. Mohammadi started to serve a 6-year prison sentence on April 
21, 2012[1], but that 
she was released on bail on July 31, 2012 for medical reasons.  
On May 3, 2015, Ms. Mohammadi 
attended the first hearing of her trial at Branch 15 of the Islamic Revolution 
Court. After the prosecutor read out the indictment against her, the trial was 
rescheduled for a later date to allow her lawyers to read the file the 
prosecution had built against her. After the 
hearing, 
Ms. Mohammadi reported that this indictment contained three main charges against 
her: 
-        
“assembly and collusion against 
the national security” based on her activities in the DHRC and cooperation with 
“the [Nobel Laureate] Shirin Ebadi, counter-revolutionary and feminist groups”; 

-        
“spreading propaganda against the 
State” based on her “interviews with foreign and counter-revolutionary media 
participation in illegal gatherings, supporting sedition and anti-security 
inmates”; and
-        
“membership of the illegal and 
anti-security LEGAM group[2]”.
For several years now, Ms. 
Mohammadi has been facing continuous judicial harassment related to her human 
rights work, including repeated summoning, interrogations and trials. 

On March 8, 2014, Ms. Mohammadi 
met the then High Representative of the 
European Union for Foreign Affairs & Security Policy, Ms. Catherine Ashton, 
at the Austrian Embassy during an official visit by Ms. Ashton to Tehran. 
Following this meeting, the Iranian authorities banned Ms. Mohammadi from 
travelling abroad, and she has been repeatedly interrogated by State security 
agents regarding her discussions with Ms. Ashton about the suppression of the 
civil society and the conditions of political prisoners in Iran. Since March 
2014, she has received 10 summons and has been detained twice by the security 
agents for several hours each time. 
On June 1, 2014 she was summoned 
to the Prosecutor's Office of the Islamic Revolution Court, where she was 
accused of “disturbing the public opinion” 
and “assembly and collusion against 
the national security” with reference to her 
participation in various activities, including meetings where participants 
criticised the government’s “Citizenship Charter” and discussed “International 
Women’s Day,” and “the Day of Clean Air.” 
In November 2014, the 
Observatory expressed fears that Ms. Mohammadi may be re-arrested on fabricated 
charges[3].
The Observatory 
expresses its deepest concern about today's arbitrary arrest of Ms. Nargess 
Mohammadi and about the ongoing judicial harassment against her, which appears 
aimed at sanctioning her human rights activities. 
The Observatory 
requests that the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention intervene 
in Ms. Mohammadi’s case, and urges the Iranian authorities to release her 
immediately and unconditionally, and to guarantee in all circumstances her 
physical and psychological integrity and that of all human rights defenders in 
Iran. The Observatory more generally urges the Iranian authorities to put an end 
to all acts of harassment - including at the judicial level - against all human 
rights defenders in Iran. 
For further information, please 
contact:
·       
FIDH: Arthur Manet / Lucie 
Kroening: + 33 1 43 55 25 18 
·       
OMCT: 
Miguel Martin Zumalacarregui: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 24



[1]      See Observatory press 
release of April 23, 
2012.

[2]      The LEGAM group is a campaign for a 
step-by-step abolition of the death penalty, established by several human rights 
defenders and activists including the human rights lawyer Ms. Nasrin 
Sotoudeh.

[3]      See Observatory press 
release of November 7, 
2014. 