India:  India: death as a result of police brutality
May  5, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / India / 2000 / MayIndia: India: death as a result of police brutalityIndia: death as a result of police brutality  Case IND 190400.1 Follow-up to case IND 190400  Geneva, 5th May 2000.  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in India.  New Information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by Antenna International and Hotline Asia, both members of the network, of the death of Colonel Pratap Save, President of Knara Bachao Sangharsh Samiti, on 20th April 2000 following police brutality.  Previously, during incidents involving protestors against the proposed Maroli-Umbergaon Port Project in Gujarat and police, Colonel Pratap Save was arrested in his home on 7th April.  He was taken to a police lock-up and reportedly held by policemen and repeatedly struck with the lathi on his chest until he collapsed on the ground but the beating continued.  Colonel Pratap Save had to be shifted to the hospital where he fell into a coma.  He was moved to Bombay on Sunday where he underwent an emergency operation for a brain haemorrhage.  According to reports he had not regained consciousness and his condition was extremely serious.  Brief reminder of the situation  Previously, the International Secretariat of OMCT had been informed by Antenna International, a member of the OMCT network, of an attack on protesters in Umbergaon (Gujarat) involving beatings and arrests.  According to the information received, On 7th April, locals protesting peacefully against the proposed Maroli-Umbergaon Port Project in Gujarat were lathi-charged and tear gassed without any warning by the State Reserve Police (SRP).  Furthermore, leaders of the Kinara Bachao Sangharsh Samiti, including Colonel Pratap Save, leading the protest were picked up by the police and brutally beaten up at the local police station.    In all about About 28 men and 18 women were arrested and taken to the Umbergaon lock-up. Around 1.30am they arrested Advocate Bhupendra Macchi and Colonel Pratap Save (President of Knara Bachao Sangharsh Samiti) from their homes.  Colonel Pratap Save, Chandrashekhar Sagar, Haresh B. Macchi, Harsh R. Macchi, Narhari Macchi and Advocate Ulhas Macchi were beaten by the police at the lock-up.  PSI Zala and Dy. Superintendent of Police Narendra Amin have been identified as taking part in the beating of the protestors with lathis.  It was then that Colonel Pratap Save was held by policemen and repeatedly struck blows with the lathi on his chest until he collapsed on the ground but the beating continued.  It is further reported that the above-mentioned detained persons were released on bail by the court on the next day but were detained under the law of preventive detention for another 24 hours.  This incident is reportedly in connection with a local protest to a proposal by the government of Gujarat to construct a mega industrial port at Umbergaon in Gujarat.  The development rights for this project have been awarded to NATELCO and UNOCAL Corporation (a U.S. based oil and gas company).  The proposed site is a breeding and spawning ground for fish and supports the fishing industry in the area.  The land is agriculturally fertile.  As such, the locals of Umbergaon oppose the port project as it will destroy fishing activity and fertile land.    Action requested  Please write to the authorities in India urging them to:  i.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the death of Colonel Pratap Save and alleged police brutality, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law;  ii.	guarantee adequate redress for the death of Colonel Pratap Save and ensure the physical and psychological integrity of all other members of Knara Bachao Sangharsh Samiti and other protestors of the Maroli-Umbergaon Port Project in Gujarat;  iii.	put an end to the use of police brutality;  iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  H.E. President K.R. Narayanan, Office of the President, Rashtrapati Bhavan, New Delhi 110 004, INDIA Fax: 91-11-301 7290 / 7824  H.E. Atal Bihari Vajpayee, Prime Minister of India, South Block, Raisina Hill, New Delhi, India-110 011  Fax: 91-11-3019545 / 91-11-3016857  Justice Venkatachellaih, Chairperson of National Human Rights Commission, Sardar Patel Bhavan, Sansad Marg, New Delhi 11001, India. Fax: 91-11-334 0016  Geneva, 5th May, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 