Turkey:  Arbitrary arrest and judicial harassment of six members of IHD and ongoing detention of four of them
February  1, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2018 / FebruaryTurkey: Arbitrary arrest and judicial harassment of six members of IHD and ongoing detention of four of them


URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY


TUR 002 / 0218 / OBS 016
Arbitrary arrest /
Arbitrary detention /
Judicial harassment
Turkey
February 1,
2018
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
Turkey.
 
Description
of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the arbitrary arrest
and judicial harassment of six members of IHD (İnsan Haklari Derneği – Human Rights Association) including Executive
Board Member Ms. Nuray Çevirmen, IHD member Mr. Ali Dağdelen, Kars Branch President Mr. Ahmet
Adigüzel, Former President of IHD Çanakkale Branch and current Executive
Board Member Mr. Hayrettin Pişkin, Malatya Branch Executive Member Mr. Mehmet
Tuncel, and Malatya
Substitute Branch Executive Mr. Abuzer
Yavas as well as of the ongoing detention of the last four. 
 
According to
the information received, since January 22, 2018, a number of IHD members were
arrested and detained in reaction to postings on social media denouncing
Turkey’s military incursion in Afrin, northern Syria against the Syrian Kurdish
People’s Protection Units (YPG) militia[1].

 
On the
evening of January 22, 2018, Ms. Nuray Çevirmen was detained at the anti-terror
unit of Ankara Security Department and released on January 25, 2018. She is
being investigated on charges of “making propaganda of a terrorist
organisation” and “instigating people to grudge and hostility”.
 
On the same
day, Mr. Ahmet Adigüzel was detained at the anti-terror unit of Ardahan
Security Department (north-eastern Turkey) before being formally placed in
detention on January 24, 2018, in Ardahan T-Type Closed Prison on charges of
“making propaganda of a terrorist organisation”. 
 
In addition,
on January 24, 2018, Mr. Hayrettin Piskin was arrested in Çanakkale
(north-western Turkey) and taken into custody in Çanakkale E-Type Prison
pending trial on charges of “making propaganda of a terrorist organisation”.
 
Charges of
“making propaganda of a terrorist organisation” are based on Article 220/8 of
the Turkish Penal Code, which carries up to three years in prison or four and a
half years, should the alleged crime be committed through the press or
broadcasting.
 
Furthermore,
on January 24, 2018, Messrs. Mehmet Tuncer, Ali Dağdelen and Abuzer Yavas were arrested and taken
into custody, in Malatya (eastern Turkey). The three human rights defenders
were initially detained over social media posts. However, as it was later
revealed that Mr. Mehmet Tuncel has no social media account, police forces
changed the accusation against Messrs. Mehmet Tuncer and Abuzer Yavas to “attending a funeral
of an armed militant” which would date back to 2001. 
 
Mr. Ali
Dağdelen who remains under investigation on charges of “making propaganda of a
terrorist organisation” was released on January 26, 2018, while Messrs. Mehmet
Tuncer and Abuzer Yavas were
transferred to E Type Prison in Malatya.
 
The
Observatory recalls that the series of arrests ordered against IHD activists
began earlier in August, 2017, when Ms. Gülseren
Yoleri, President of the IHD
Istanbul Branch and IHD Executive Committee member, and Mr. Dogan Ozkan, member of IHD Istanbul
executive board were arrested during another demonstration in support of Ms.
Nuriye Gülmen and Mr. Semih Özakça, two teachers
who have been victims of the wave of dismissals of civil servants which
followed the 2016 failed coup in Turkey.[2]. Both were
victims of ill-treatment during their arrest and three days detention.
 
In November
2017, Mr. Ozturk Turkdogan,
President of the national branch of the Human Rights Association, Ms. Sevim Salihoglu and Ms. Derya Uysal, two IHD Executive
Committee members, as well as Ms. Besra
Varli, IHD member, were arrested as they were demonstrating in support of Ms. Nuriye Gülmen and Mr. Semih Özakça in front of
the Human Rights Statute in Yüksel Avenue, Ankara, and placed in custody before
being released on the same day[3].

 
The Observatory strongly condemns this new wave of arbitrary arrests
targeting human rights defenders, and in particular IHD members, in the
exercise of their legitimate and peaceful human rights activities as well as
the recurrent obstacles to freedoms of association and peaceful assembly in
Turkey.
 
Accordingly,
the Observatory calls upon the Turkish judicial authorities to immediately and
unconditionally release Messrs. Ahmet Adigüzel, Hayrettin Pişkin, Mehmet Tuncel and Abuzer Yavas and to put an end to all forms of harassment against them, Ms. Nuray
Çevirmen and Mr. Ali Dağdelen as
well as against all IHD members.
 
Actions
requested: 
 
Please write to the
authorities in Turkey, urging them to:
 
i.              
Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Nuray Çevirmen, Messrs.
Ahmet Adigüzel, Hayrettin Pişkin, Mehmet
Tuncel, Ali Dağdelen and Abuzer Yavas as well as of all human rights defenders in Turkey; 
 
ii.             
Immediately and unconditionally release Messrs. Ahmet Adigüzel, Hayrettin
Pişkin, Mehmet Tuncel and Abuzer Yavas as well as all detained
human rights defenders in Turkey;
 
iii.           
Put an end to all forms of
harassment, against Ms. Nuray Çevirmen, Messrs. Ahmet Adigüzel, Hayrettin
Pişkin, Mehmet Tuncel, Ali Dağdelen and Abuzer Yavas, as well as all IHD members and human rights defenders in Turkey;
 
iv.            
Comply with all the
provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted
by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular its Articles 1,
6(a), 9, 11 and 12.2;
 
v.             
Ensure in all
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with international human rights standards and international instruments
ratified by Turkey.
 
 
Addresses:
 
·       President of
Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Fax: (+90 312) 525 58 31
·       Prime
Minister of Turkey Binali Yıldırım. Email: ozelkalem@basbakanlik.gov.tr
·       Minister of
Justice, Mr. Bekir Bozdağ. E-mail: ozelkalem@adalet.gov.tr
·       Minister of
Interior, Mr. Süleyman Soylu. Fax: +90 (312) 425 61 30
·       Ambassador
Izzet Selim Yenel, Diplomatic Mission of Turkey to the European Union in
Brussels, Belgium. Fax: + 32 2 511 04 50
·       Ambassador
Mr. Ali Naci Koru, Permanent Mission of Turkey to the United Nations in
Geneva, Switzerland. Email: mission.turkey@ties.itu.int
 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of
Turkey in your respective country.
 
***
 
Paris-Geneva, February 1, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code
of this appeal in your reply. 
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The objective of this programme is to
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the
European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international
civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·       E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·       Tel and fax FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·       Tel and fax OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
 



[1]                The military offensive began
on January 20, 2018 and is directed at the Kurdish Autonomous Administration’s
military wing, the People’s Protection Units (YPG). Turkish authorities have
cited YPG’s links to the armed Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) as the grounds
for this military offensive.


[2]                See the Observatory Urgent Appeal TUR 006 / 0817 / OBS 086 published on August 9,
2017.


[3]                See the Observatory Urgent Appeal TUR 007 / 1117 / OBS
111 published on November 9, 2017. 