Argentina:  Argentina: harassment and death threats against Mrs. Olga Lúquez and various members of her family in the city of Mendoza
November  1, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Argentina / 2001 / NovemberArgentina: Argentina: harassment and death threats against Mrs. Olga Lúquez and various members of her family in the city of MendozaCase ARG 011101  Description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source about harassment and death threats against Mrs. Olga Lúquez and various members of her family in the city of Mendoza.  According to the information received, Mrs. Olga Lúquez headed a campaign demanding justice for the death of her son, Roberto Augustin Lúquez, who was shot by policemen from the Tropera Sosa police station on September 17th 1999.  Recently the harassment and death threats have become more serious and one of the policemen from that police station has threatened her personally by telephone.  It was reported that on October 11th, while Mrs. Olga Lúquez was taking her daughter to school, she noticed a police car awaiting them in the schoolyard.  Various armed policemen left the car on her arrival and entry into the building.  The school authorities told her that none of them had called the police.  On September 17th 2001 Mrs. Olga Lúquez took part in a regional television programme to mark the anniversary of her son’s death.  On the same day, while she was in a bus, she was intimidated by a policeman pointing his gun at her. Some family friends who took part in the television programme have also received death threats.  According to the information received, some of them were interrogated by the police who threatened them in obscene terms, warning them to stop their activities.  Young Roberto Agustin Lúquez, aged 17, was allegedly walking down a street with a friend when three people who looked like policemen got out of a patrol car and approached them as though they intended to detain them.  The boys, who did not have their identity cards with them, ran away while Roberto hid in a neighbour’s house.  The policemen followed him inside and shot him with a gun loaded with rubber bullets.  Three of the bullets perforated his lungs; he was taken to hospital but died 16 days later as a result of the wounds.  One of the policemen has been accused of accidental homicide, while two others were not included in the investigation.  Even though the investigation has suffered delays and obstacles, Mrs. Olga Lúquez is determined to pursue it since she believes that she and her family are in danger, both physically and psychologically.  The International Secretariat of OMC is deeply concerned about the security and physical and psychological integrity of Mrs.Olga Lúquez and the other members of her family.   Geneva, 1st November 2001 