The Arrest of Political Leaders
15_08_2011
The issue of arbitrary arrest, detention, and expulsion of Palestinian officials in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (OPT) continues to infringe upon the human rights of Palestinians.Since the beginning of 2006, 49 Palestinian political leaders have been arrested, most receiving prison sentences of over three years.1 In the aftermath of the Palestinian Legislative elections of January 2006, three newly elected Palestinian Legislative Council members fell victim to such violations.2 All three were arrested on charges of membership in the party and of having an official position in the Change and Reform Bloc. One member, Muhammad Hasan Abu-Teir, had his Israeli-issued-ID revoked and was forcibly transferred from East Jerusalem to Ramallah on 8 December 2010.Recent arrests include, on 5 May, the detention of Fatah leader Hussam Khader, who is now serving six months of administrative detention on unknown charges. In total, five Palestinian political leaders have been detained since the beginning of May 2011.3The trend continued this week when Israeli forces arrested two officials in the cities of Jenin and Nablus. When predicated on political affiliation, these arbitrary arrests contribute to the denial of the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination and violate other provisions of international law.Israeli forces arrest member of the Palestinian Legislative CouncilOn 7 June, 73-year-old representative of the Change and Reform Bloc Ahmad ‘Ali Ahmad was arrested from his home in Nablus by Israeli forces. Ahmad was taken from his home at approximately 1:30 am that morning. The Israeli forces had removed the lock on the front door of the house, which left the door mildly damaged. In a related operation Israeli forces broke into and ransacked the Nablus offices of the Change and Reform Bloc.4 (See Al-Haq Affidavit No. 6400 / 2011).Israeli forces arrest former Hamas MinisterOn 9 June, 52-year-old Wasfi ‘Izzat Mustafa, formerly the Minister of Prisoners Affairs in the Palestinian Government and a member of Hamas, was arrested from his home in the al-Iskan neighborhood of the West Bank city of Jenin. Israeli forces arrived at his house at around 12:30 am to arrest him for a fourth time. Since then, Wasfi has been held in detention on unknown charges at the Megiddo prison, north of Jenin, outside the OPT (See Al-Haq Affidavit No. 6399/2011).Wasfi previously spent three years in administrative detention before his appointment to the Ministry. After entering the government, he was arrested again on two separate occasions and detained for a total of three years.These arrests are examples of a long trend of political arrests, detentions, and forcible transfers of Palestinians by Israeli forces in the OPT.In many cases these measures present Palestinian officials with the choice of either abandoning their representative capacity or facing punishment from Israeli authorities, including being deprived of their residency rights. This policy violates their basic rights on a number of levels:·Download the Weekly Focus as a PDF