Israeli Forces Raid Palestinian Cities in the West Bank
09_07_2015
Between 29 June and 4 July, Al-Haq monitored and documented several incidents in which Israeli Occupying Forces (IOF) raided towns and cities in the governorates of Qalqiliya, Nablus, Jericho, Jenin, Bethlehem, Tulkarem, and Salfit of the West Bank. In the reporting period, the forces ransacked homes and shops, and arrested at least 38 Palestinians.On Monday 29 June at approximately 2:45 am, Iman Ali Obeidi, 28, heard heavy knocking at the door and the IOF calling to open the door. Iman's husband, Mahmoud Ahmad Obeidi, 32, asked them to wait until Iman was covered. In response, the forces broke the window of the main door. Mahmoud opened the door for them while Iman rushed into the bedroom to change. Iman was shocked to find one of the IOF members already in the bedroom. He threatened her at gun point not to make any noise or sound. He then ordered her to go into the living room where she found Mahmoud. His hands were tied behind his back and his feet were tied with zip ties. He was made to sit on his knees on the ground with his face turned to the wall. Iman sat next to her husband as the soldiers searched the house.Approximately 20 minutes later, one of the soldiers ordered Iman to accompany him to the bedroom. There, he asked her to turn in two cell phones and a laptop used by Mahmoud. Iman did as asked. At approximately 4:00 am, the soldiers escorted Mahmoud to the military jeeps parked near the house and left. Once they left, Iman found that the soldiers had searched all of their belongings in the house. She also could not find her husband's wallet which contained 500 shekels. By 1 July, Iman still did not know the location where her husband was detained. (Al-Haq Affidavit No. 10821/2015)Al-Haq condemns the recurring Israeli raids of Palestinian areas and homes and the conduct of the IOF during such raids which threatens the safety and security of the occupied Palestinian population. Under international humanitarian law (IHL) and international human rights law (IHRL), protected persons are entitled in all circumstances to be treated humanely, with respect for their dignity and security. Furthermore, reprisal against protected persons and their property is prohibited. Article 17 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) guarantees the right to be protected against such arbitrary or unlawful interference with privacy, family, or home. Additionally, article 9 of the ICCPR states that every individual has the right to liberty and security of person and that no one should be subject to arbitrary arrest or detention.