Burundi: assistance for people seeking justice should be strengthened
4 August 2011
4 August 2011Brussels, 4 August 2011 – An important ASF study on legal advice and representation in Burundi promotes the establishment of a durable legal aid system in this central African country. According to the study based on a large opinion survey of the local population in five provinces, aid for people subject to trial – particularly those who are most vulnerable – should be improved.Legal aid encompasses all acts of assistance given to people seeking justice, from providing legal advice to accompanying them in court. The ASF study carried out in March 2011, in agreement with the Ministries of Justice and of Interior of Burundi, consists of an opinion survey of 1,079 people who have faced trial over the past five years. According to this survey, legal aid is insufficient and not sufficiently coordinated to properly respond to the demand. Thus, 87% of the people surveyed  declared to be in  need of a specialist to assist them in  court hearings.After the civil war which hit Burundi in the mid 90s, justice, along with other areas of public authority, was deeply put into question. The legal aid sector has slowly been rebuilt over the past decade but the challenges are still vast. “Even if the Lawyers’ Order of Burundi has developed, those seeking justice are essentially being helped by civil society organisations.”, notes Julien Moriceau, the consultant in charge of the ASF study. “Furthermore, the justice system in Burundi is still affected by numerous malfunctions: procedures are slow, information sent to lawyers is often incomplete and there are frequent corruption suspicions with State officials”, he adds. This situation particularly affects the most vulnerable people within the Burundi society, such as prisoners, women, minors and the impoverished.This first analysis financed by the UK Department for International Development (DFID) identifies four priorities for legal aid in Burundi: more effective involvement on the part of lawyers, NGOs and authorities; more recognition of the needs of those seeking justice; a consensus on the further development of the sector; and enhanced training of the professionals involved. “We have sent out our analysis to those involved in legal aid in Burundi: civil society organisations, the Bar and the Ministry of Justice. Brought together in a Forum, they will further  consider our recommendations taking into account the final objective:  a minimum legal aid system for the benefit of the most vulnerable people, such as prisoners”, concludes Ingrid Kanyamuneza.Basic study on legal advice and representation in Burundi (pdf in French)For more information on the permanent ASF mission in Burundi