ASF receives an exceptional donation from the Belgian Development Cooperation
24 December 2015
24 December 2015Boom/Brussels – On Thursday (24 December 2015), Avocats Sans Frontières (ASF) received a donation of €50,000 from the Belgian Development Cooperation. The Deputy Prime Minister and Belgian Minister for Development Aid, Alexander De Croo, personally presented a cheque to ASF as part of the solidarity event “Music for Life”. This donation provides valuable aid at a time when NGOs are finding it increasingly difficult to access development aid funds.It was ten years ago that the Flemish radio station Studio Brussel started organising “Music for Life”. The purpose of this event is to raise funds for good causes. For one week the radio station plays listener requests in exchange for donations. Donations can also be made via events or activities or in the form of “institutional” donations. In total, over 1,000 good causes will share the money raised.Every year the Belgian Government contributes to this very popular show of solidarity (more than 200,000 “likes” on Facebook). Amongst all the beneficiaries that receive funds from Music for Life this year, there are two organisations that have received a donation from the Belgian Development Cooperation: ASF and Medics Without Vacation.“We decided to make a donation to ASF in order to support its work promoting access to justice in post-conflict countries or countries in transition. ASF is active in a number of our partner countries such as Burundi, Uganda and DR Congo. These countries will not be able to achieve lasting development without their citizens being able to exercise theirs basic rights“, declared Minister De Croo at the event.“This donation is particularly welcome given that access to project financing is becoming increasingly difficult. Populations in vulnerable situations need our support“, argues Chantal van Cutsem, ASF Strategic Coordinator. “For the victims of international crimes, those detained illegally, women and the destitute, having access to justice re-establishes one’s dignity and builds for the future.”ASF has also benefited from another act of kindness as part of ” Music for Life “. A group of law students at the Thomas More School  in Malines asked the public to express their opposition to the numerous human rights violations by smashing dishes for a cost of €2, in order to raise funds for ASF.“Every act of solidarity counts. From every donation of €10, €9 go directly to our activities in the field with our partners and on our work with the population“, concludes Chantal van Cutsem.The activities of ASF are essentially financed thanks to institutional sponsors. The Belgian Development Cooperation is the third largest technical and financial partner after the European Union and British development aid.You can also support Avocats Sans Frontières!