Resolution on the Human Rights Situation in Somalia
November 12, 2007
The Forum of Participation of NGOs, meeting on 10-12 November 2007, in Brazzaville, Republic of Congo,Considering the armed conflict between the Somali government forces, supported by the Ethiopian army, and the insurgents, characterised by grave violations of international humanitarian and human rights law, causing numerous deaths, including amongst the civilian population.Considering in particular the violent attacks committed between 27-29 October 2007, which led to the forced displacement of around 88,000 persons from Mogadishu;Considering the repeated attacks, including suicide attacks against government soldiers and allied Ethiopian forces, as well as the increasing number of targeted killings, of which the majority of victims are representatives or supporters of the Government;Considering the summary executions and murders of journalists, as well as the serious threats against and harassment of human rights defenders;Considering the numerous attacks against staff members of the AU Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), deployed since February 2007, under the mandate of the UN Security Council;Considering the obstacles to the work of humanitarian organisations and UN agencies;Considering the ongoing humanitarian catastrophe in Somalia, in particular the 800,000 internally displaced persons and more than 1.5 million individuals who, according to UN estimates, are in urgent need of protection;The NGO Forum requests the ACHPR to adopt a Resolution:1.	Condemning the serious violations of human rights and international humanitarian law committed by all parties to the conflict;
2.	Calling for the prosecution of the perpetrators of serious violations of human rights and international humanitarian law, with full respect for the right to a fair trial;
3.	Deciding to send an ACHPR mission to Somalia;
4.	Recommending:All parties to the conflict:a. To stop immediately all attacks against civilians and staff members of the AMISOM;
b. To facilitate free access and the work of humanitarian organisations and UN agencies in the country;
c. To adopt a cease fire without further delay;
d. To respect the right to freedom of speech of journalists and human rights defenders;
e. To continue and reinforce negotiations to create representative national institutions emerging from an inclusive political process as envisaged by the Federal Charter of Transition, with a view to achieving stability, peace and reconciliation in the country;The Ethiopian authorities:a. To withdraw all troops and to hand over to the AMISOM;The African Union:a. To increase the number of AMISOM personnel;
b. To reinforce the mandate of AMISOM in order to create safe conditions of access for humanitarian aid and to protect civilians;The International Community:a. To respect an embargo on weapons, as imposed by the UN Security Council;To the UN Security Council:a. To speed up the process of consultation on the deployment of a peace-keeping operation in Somalia.Done in Brazzaville, November 12th, 2007The African Centre for Democracy and Human Rights Studies (ACDHRS)Website: www.acdhrs.orgEmail: admin@acdhrs.orgZoe Tembo Building Kerr Serign,
P.O.Box 2728 Serrekunda, The GambiaTelephone: +220 4462341With the Technical Support of HURIDOCS