Resolution on Indigenous Peoples
November 9, 2010
We, Participants at the NGO Forum in preparation of the 48th Ordinary Session of the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights; from 7th – 9th Nov. 2010, in Banjul, The Gambia,Considering that the situation of oppression and by governments of the indigenous communities continues even in 2010;Considering that despite the ruling by ACHPR in some states due to violations of articles 14(violation of rights to property) 17(2) Right to culture), 21, 22, and others which guarantees rights to life and property;Deeply concerned about:Condemning in the strongest terms possible:Supporting:Existing self-regulatory bodies and any other initiatives to set up such bodies in African Union member states according the articles stated above on the rights of the indigenous communities.Commending:The ACHPR for giving favourable rulings on the plight of the indigenous peoples.The NGO Forum call on the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights to adopt a resolution:1.     Condemning the Botswana government for ignoring the ACHPR ruling on the San Bushmen (2006) and reminding the government to implement it and respect the basic rights of the people, most importantly water and land.2      Urging the Kenyan government to respect its ruling and move with speed to implement the recommendations on the Endorois Case.3.     Urging the Kenya government to stop the intended forced eviction of Ogiek community from Mau Forest, their ancestral land.4.     Urging the government of Kenya to facilitate the mapping of Ogiek territories by the Ogiek Civic society groups.5.    Conducting a special visit to Tanzania to see the situation of the indigenous pastoralists evicted from their lands for themselves.6.    Asking the government of Tanzania to recognize the existence and respect the rights of indigenous communities in Tanzania.7.    Advising the government to make public reports of commissions formed to investigate the violations of human rights in Ihefu, Kilosa and Loliondo, in Tanzania.8.    Urging the Burundi government to stop the wanton killings of the Batwa people:a. Conducting      an urgent visit to Burundi to investigate the situation there as a      preventive mechanism of gross human rights violation in the country.b. Asking the government of Burundi and the      government of Botswana to  investigate the violation of human rights      committed against  indigenous peoples in their respective countries and to      punish the  authors.Done at Banjul, November 9th, 2010The African Centre for Democracy and Human Rights Studies (ACDHRS)Website: www.acdhrs.orgEmail: admin@acdhrs.orgZoe Tembo Building Kerr Serign,
P.O.Box 2728 Serrekunda, The GambiaTelephone: +220 4462341With the Technical Support of HURIDOCS