Resolution on the Situation in Nigeria
November 9, 2008
We, Participants of the Forum on the Participation of NGOs in the 44th Ordinary Session of the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights,Reaffirming that the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights guarantees the Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of Nigerians like other citizens of Africa,Recalling that the Fundamental objective of the Commission is to give effect to provisions of the Charter for the benefit of African citizens,Condemning the wide spread and systemic violations of internationally recognised economic, social and cultural rights in Nigeria,Confirming that Nigeria already ratified and domesticated the African Charter through an act of Parliament,Realizing that the identified human rights violations precede the present government in Nigeria,Recognizing the efforts of the present government commitment to promotion of human rights with the official adoption of a country’s National Action on human rights,Hopeful that the seating of the 44th session in African Commission in Nigeria will encourage creation of a culture of human rights,Call upon the African Commission on Human and People’s Rights to Urge the Federal government to do the following:1. To implement the SERAC case;2. To conduct a fact finding mission in the Niger Delta and appoint the Special Rapporteur on Prisons in Africa to assess the problem of overcrowding and torture in prisons,3. To enforce the rights of the people of Niger Delta to environment, development and other socio economic rights enshrined in the African Charter,4. To ensure that military force from the Niger Delta operates in full conformity with international standard and norms for the promotion of human rights,5. To implement National Action Plan on protection and promotion of human rights,6. To domesticate international instruments it has ratified such as CEDAW, and the Convention Against Torture and Optional protocol,7. To promulgate laws on: protecting women against violence, the Freedom of Information as well as rights of people with disabilities,8. To pass children’s right law and set up machineries for its implementation,9. To provide free and compulsory primary and secondary education,10. To strengthen internal and external oversight institutions of police for addressing the prevailing culture of impunity,11. To end culture of rampant political killings in the country, reform the political system and guarantee the right of people to participate in government, including free election of leaders.Done in Abuja, November 9th, 2008The African Centre for Democracy and Human Rights Studies (ACDHRS)Website: www.acdhrs.orgEmail: admin@acdhrs.orgZoe Tembo Building Kerr Serign,
P.O.Box 2728 Serrekunda, The GambiaTelephone: +220 4462341With the Technical Support of HURIDOCS