10 things you didn’t know about slavery in UK
12 July 2016
In June we welcomed two student activists from University College London (UCL) for an introduction into the fast-paced world of human rights campaigning!They spent one week in our Communications Team and developed a video and digital campaign entitled ’10 Things You Didn’t Know About Slavery’. View the results of their work below. Thank you to Ellie and Jayne for their energy, talent and commitment!12 July 2016From our student activist, Eleanor MeadIt’s not every day you get to work for the world’s oldest international human rights organisation, and it’s definitely not every day that you’re granted exclusive access to their archives. For 177 years Anti-Slavery International has been campaigning to end slavery in all its forms, and their incredible archive and library is a testament to that. Books, newspaper clippings and reports pile shelf after dusty shelf; portraits of abolitionists old and new line the walls; and you can trace this organisation’s incredible work from the dusty tomes of its founding years to the passionate content they produce today. Being there was a true privilege.Our campaign takes its inspiration from the afternoon we spent in these archives. While slavery has been around for a long long time, it is too often confined to the history books. We want to emphasise that slavery has evolved: it still exists, and much closer to home than we’d like to think. And – perhaps more importantly – we want to emphasise that slavery activism has also evolved. The wealth of passion, knowledge and power that has gone into fighting slavery for all these years is genuinely inspirational. You can sense it in the organisation and all that they do. And it’s informing our campaign in so many ways. I hope you enjoy following our journey through slavery in the UK and how to tackle it!From our student activist, Jayne LiuWorking with Anti-Slavery International has been a truly insightful experience into the issues of modern slavery. Modern slavery exists worldwide, and not just in foreign countries as some might imagine, but even here in the UK. The practice of slavery did not end with Slavery Abolition Act in 1833. Anti-Slavery International has made notable progress in tackling slavery in the UK, which is highlighted by the passing of the Modern Slavery Act in 2015.Our campaign work with Anti-Slavery focuses on how slavery has evolved over time. Slavery no longer takes the form of what is learned in history class and it still happens today. The issue of modern slavery needs to be addressed and be considered a prominent in the issue in the UK.The vision of a world free from slavery is not just finding a solution but a steady and ongoing process. Join the movement today to eliminate the practice of slavery in all its forms, here in the UK and elsewhere in the world. More can still be done.