Press Office
27 February 2009
With any media queries and to arrange interviews please conact Communications Manager Jakub SobikAidan McQuade, Director 
During his tenure as Director of Anti-Slavery International, Dr. Aidan McQuade’s achievements have included holding the state of Niger to account in an international court for failing to protect its citizens from slavery, ensuring the inclusion of a target to end modern slavery in the Sustainable Development Goals, obtaining a new statute in British law proscribing forced labour and mounting a series of investigations identifying where forced labour is used in the developing world for the production of goods for western markets as well as exposing human trafficking activity in the UK. In 2010, Aidan was awarded a doctorate for his thesis entitled, “Doing the right thing: human agency and ethical choice-making in professional practice”.Klára Skrivánková, UK and Europe Programme Manager
Klara is a recognised expert on human trafficking. In 2005 she joined Anti-Slavery International where she leads its UK & Europe Programme. Klara has frequently provided expert witness statements in courts in the UK, Ireland and Hong Kong in modern slavery cases. She co-founded the UK Trafficking Law and Policy Forum. Klara has held numerous expert and advisory roles, including at the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, Ethical Trading Initiative, Council of Europe, the EU Experts Group on Trafficking in Human Beings, the UN Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking and the UN Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery. She has also authored and contributed to numerous publications, including the “Human Trafficking Handbook: Recognising Trafficking and Modern-Day Slavery in the UK”.Sarah Mathewson, Africa Programme Manager
Sarah Mathewson manages programme aimed at eradicating slavery and challenging slavery-related discrimination in Mali, Mauritania and Niger. She also runs a project to end forced child begging in Senegal and protect children in domestic work from exploitation in Tanzania. She is currently based in London, but her work involves regular travel to West Africa to support research, government and UN advocacy, training workshops, awareness-raising campaigns and legal and socio-economic assistance to victims of slavery. Prior to joining Anti-Slavery International, Sarah worked for the Africa Programme at Child Soldiers International, and in the Africa Division of Human Rights Watch. She also lived in Senegal for several years, during which she worked for the Regional Adviser for Social and Human Sciences at UNESCO. Consultancies include research for the Open Society Justice Initiative.Jakub Sobik, Communications Manager
Jakub Sobik joined Anti-Slavery International in 2007, and has been the organisation’s spokesperson since 2013. He has a background in communications and journalism and is a regular contributor on modern slavery to major media outlets in the UK and overseas.