Award-winning director calls on public to take action for Anti-Slavery Day
18 October 2011
18 October 2011Mike Leigh, the director of Another Year, Vera Drake and Happy-Go-Lucky, has made a passionate call for the British people to take part in the ongoing fight to end slavery across the world.Speaking especially for Anti-Slavery Day (Tuesday 18 October), the award-winning film director and writer, said: “Slavery is a terrible crime against humanity, and it needs everyone in society to play a part in eradicating it. It needs to be abolished, because every human being should be allowed to live and work in safety, with dignity, choice and freedom, and to get justice if they are not. And because every human being’s life is beyond price. I urge you to join with Anti-Slavery International in its work to help stop it in all its forms throughout the world.”Anti-Slavery Day was established by Parliament in 2010 to provide a focal point for raising awareness about the many people in the UK and around the world who continue to be trapped in modern slavery, and to promote the need for individuals and organisations across society to play a part in ending it.Across the country, there are a series of events to raise awareness of slavery for Anti-Slavery Day. For a full list visit: www.antislaveryday.org.uk.Anti-Slavery Day Inaugural Young People’s Conference
Tuesday 18th October, 9am-3.30pm
Venue: The Museum of London in Docklands,  Speakers include Baroness Lola Young of Hornsey and Rushanara Ali, MP for Bethnal Green and Bow. Students will have the opportunity to put questions to the speakers as well as participate in various workshops. www.antislavery.org/conference.Anti-Slavery Day Panel Discussion
International Slavery Museum. Tuesday 18 October, 12-4pm
Venue: International Slavery Museum, Albert Dock, Liverpool, L3
To mark this important day please join special guest speaker Cherie Blair, artist Nicola Green, and Anti-Slavery International director Aidan McQuade. The event is free but pre-booking essential www.liverpoolmuseums.org.uk/ism.Camden Council Anti-Slavery Day event
Tuesday 18th October, 11am-3pm
Venue: Russell Square, London WC1B
Come along for music, performance and talks.Unchosen Film Season against Human TraffickingScreening of ‘Britain’s Secret Slaves’ with post film Q&A
in partnership with Anti-Slavery International and the Museum of London. Tuesday 18th October 2011 at 7pm. Free admission but please book in advance at www.museumoflondon.org.UK/Docklands.Screening of ‘I am Slave’
Tuesday 18th October at 8.30pm
Venue: Little Theatre,1-2 St. Michaels Place, Bath BA1 1SF
£2 Entry, please book in advance www.picturehouses.co.uk/cinema/The_Little/film/I_Am_Slave/..Screening of ‘The hunt for Britain’s sex traffickers’
Tuesday 18th October at 7pm
Venue: Hall 2, Colston Hall, 13 Colston Street, Bristol BS1 5AR
£2 Entry, please book in advance www.colstonhall.org/whatson/2011/10/18.Screening of ‘Stolen’
in partnership with Anti-Slavery International. Tuesday 1st November at 6.30pm
International and the London School of Economics Centre for Human Rights. Free admission www.unchosen.org.uk.