Report: Forced to Flee Central America's Northern Triangle

May 11 17
An estimated 500,000 people cross into Mexico every year[1]. The majority making up this massive forced migration flow originate from El Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala, known as the Northern Triangle of Central America (NTCA), one of the most violent regions in the world today.Since 2012, the international medical humanitarian organization Doctors Without Borders/Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) has been providing medical and mental health care to tens of thousands of migrants and refugees fleeing the NTCA’s extreme violence and traveling along the world’s largest migration corridor in Mexico. Through violence assessment surveys and medical and psychosocial consultations, MSF teams have witnessed and documented a pattern of violent displacement, persecution, sexual violence, and forced repatriation akin to the conditions found in the deadliest armed conflicts in the world today[2].For millions of people from the NTCA region, trauma, fear, and horrific violence are dominant facets of daily life. Yet it is a reality that does not end with their forced flight to Mexico. Along the migration route from the NTCA, migrants and refugees are preyed upon by criminal organizations, sometimes with the tacit approval or complicity of national authorities, and subjected to violence and other abuses—abduction, theft, extortion, torture, and rape—that can leave them injured and traumatized.Despite existing legal protections under Mexican law, they are systematically detained and deported. Nearly 98 percent of NTCA citizens were captured by immigration authorities in 2015, with devastating consequences on their physical and mental health.The findings of this report, based on surveys and medical programmatic data from the past two years, come against the backdrop of heightened immigration enforcement by Mexico and the United States, including the use of detention and deportation. Such practices threaten to drive more refugees and migrants into the brutal hands of smugglers or criminal organizations.From January 2013 to December 2016, MSF teams have provided 33,593 consultations to migrants and refugees from the NTCA through direct medical care in several mobile health clinics, migrant centers, and hostels—known locally as albergues—across Mexico.Through these activities, MSF has documented the extensive levels of violence against patients treated in these clinics, as well as the mental health impact of trauma experienced prior to fleeing countries of origin and while on the move.Since the program’s inception, MSF teams have expressed concern about the lack of institutional and government support to the people it is treating and supporting along the migration route. In 2015 and 2016, MSF began surveying patients and collecting medical data and testimonies. This was part of an effort by MSF to better understand the factors driving migration from the NTCA, and to assess the medical needs and vulnerabilities specific to the migrant and refugee population MSF is treating in Mexico.The surveys and medical data were limited to MSF patients and people receiving treatment in MSF supported clinics. Nevertheless, this is some of the most comprehensive medical data available on migrants and refugees from Central America. This report provides stark evidence of the extreme levels of violence experienced by people fleeing from El Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala, and underscores the need for adequate health care, support, and protection along the migration route through Mexico.In 2015, MSF carried out a survey of 467 randomly sampled migrants and refugees in facilities the organization supports in Mexico. We gathered additional data from MSF clinics from 2015 through December 2016. Key findings of the survey include:The MSF survey and project data from 2015-2016 show a clear pattern of victimization—both as the impetus for many people to flee the NTCA and as part of their experience along the migration route. The pattern of violence documented by MSF plays out in a context where there is an inadequate response from governments, and where immigration and asylum policies disregard the humanitarian needs of migrants and refugees.Despite the existence of a humanitarian crisis affecting people fleeing violence in the NTCA, the number of related asylum grants in the United States and Mexico remains low. Given the tremendous levels of violence against migrants and refugees in their countries of origin and along the migration route in Mexico, the existing legal framework should provide effective protection mechanisms to victimized populations. Yet people forced to flee the NTCA are mostly treated as economic migrants by countries of refuge such as Mexico or the United States.Less than 4,000 people fleeing El Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala were granted asylum status in 2016[3]. In addition, the government of Mexico deported 141,990 people from the NTCA. Regarding the situation in the United States, by the end of 2015, 98,923 individuals from the NTCA had submitted requests for refugee or asylum status according to UNHCR[4]. Nevertheless, the number of asylums granted to individuals from the NTCA has been comparatively low, with just 9,401 granted since 2011[5].As a medical humanitarian organization that works in more than 60 countries, MSF delivers emergency aid to people affected by armed conflict, epidemics, disasters, and exclusion from health care. The violence suffered by people in the NTCA is comparable to the experience in war zones where MSF has been present for decades. Murder, kidnappings, threats, recruitment by non-state armed actors, extortion, sexual violence, and forced disappearance are brutal realities in many of the conflict areas where MSF provides support.The evidence gathered by MSF points to the need to understand that the story of migration from the NTCA is not only about economic migration, but about a broader humanitarian crisis.While there are certainly people leaving the NTCA for better economic opportunities in the United States, the data presented in this report also paints a dire picture of a story of migration from the NTCA as one of people running for their lives. It is a picture of repeated violence, beginning in NTCA countries and causing people to flee, and extending through Mexico, with a breakdown in people’s access to medical care and ability to seek protection in Mexico and the United States.It is a humanitarian crisis that demands that the governments of Mexico and United States, with the support of countries in the region and international organizations, rapidly scale up the application of legal protection measures—asylum, humanitarian visas, and temporary protected status—for people fleeing violence in the NTCA region; immediately cease the systematic deportation of NTCA citizens; and expand access to medical, mental health, and sexual violence care services for migrants and refugees.This report was updated on June 14, 2017, to include the following corrections and clarifications: On pp. 5 and 21, we noted the number of people detained and deported based on data from 2016, not 2015 as reported earlier. On p. 6, we corrected the list of places where MSF has worked along the migration route to properly identify the respective states. And on p. 27, we changed the final sentence to clarify that the humanitarian crisis is a regional issue involving countries of origin, transit, and destination.[1] Source: UNHCR MEXICO FACTSHEET. February 2017. Last visited 18 April 2017. Data compiled by UNHCR based on SEGOB and INM official sources.[2] The Geneva Declaration on Armed Violence and Development. Global Burden of Armed Violence 2015: Every Body Counts, October 2015, Chapter Two, http://www.genevadeclaration.org/fileadmin/docs/GBAV3/GBAV3_Ch2_pp49-86.pdf[3] Source: UNHCR MEXICO FACTSHEET. February 2017.[4] Regional Response to the Northern Triangle of Central America Situation. UNHCR. Accessed on 01/02/2017 at http://reporting.unhcr.org/sites/default/files/UNHCR%20-%20NTCA%20Situation%20Supplementary%20Appeal%20-%20June%202016.pdf[5] Source: MSF calculations based on information from United States Homeland Security. Yearbook of Immigration Statistics 2015.