Press Teleconference on Lopinavir/Ritonavir

Mar 15 06
Transcript of a press teleconference on the lack of availability of Abbott's new heat-stable Kaletra in African countries.The new formulation of lopinavir/ritonavir by Abbott Laboratories does not require refrigeration which makes this a critical component of the second-line treatment regimens we use. And it makes it one of the very few options that we have that are actually adapted for use in developing countries. However, today this drug is only available in the U.S. Because MSF has an urgent need to provide this drug to our patients, we have placed an order today with Abbott's worldwide headquarters in Chicago to meet the needs of our patients.To discuss this issue further we will be speaking with Nathan Ford, the Coordinator of MSF's Campaign for Access to Essential Medicines in South Africa. Dr. Jens Henkel, a clinician in an MSF HIV/AIDS treatment project in Lagos, Nigeria,, and Dr. Binta Diawardiani, the Medical Coordinator of MSF's projects in Homa Bay, Kenya. We will hear from each of our speakers for just a few minutes and then open it up to questions.So at this point I'd like to turn it over to Nathan Ford.I'm sitting in South Africa at the moment. I'm working in an HIV program where we have two sites treating patients. One is in the western cape near Cape Town where we treat three-and- a-half thousand patients. And the other in the eastern cape, in Lusikisiki, where we have another one-and-a-half thousand patients on treatment. We've been working here for about five years. And we've been seeing that the general trend is a need for second-line drugs after four years of treatment on first-line medicines. Today, around 16 percent of patients need second-line treatment. We can be pretty sure that that's going to get higher and higher as time goes on.Here in Lusikisiki in the Eastern Cape it's around 37 degrees Celsius [99 degrees F]. It's a very, very hot day. Half the clinics have no electricity and certainly most of the people we're helping have no refrigerators. So this second line drug that we're pushing for today, the lopinavir/ritonavir combination that doesn't need to be refrigerated, seems to me to be designed for use in Africa, precisely in these sections where people don't have refrigeration or electricity. And it's very frustrating for me to consider that this drug might not be available in Africa for many, many years to come. So we think it's important that Abbott make clear commitments to making this drug registered and available and affordable as soon as possible.Now it's not just MSF in South Africa that needs this drug. There have been clear demands from physicians all over South Africa and in fact from many other countries who have signed on to a letter to try and push Abbott to make these commitments. We have physicians from roughly 25 countries that have signed on to a letter demanding three things from Abbott. The first is that Abbott takes seriously the registration of this drug. One of the problems with accessing drugs is that they might be available on the general market, but unless the company actually takes steps to register the drug, the public sector cannot use those medicines and that can lead to several years' delay. We've seen it with other medicines and we're very, very concerned that we're going to see that problem with this medicine. So they need to submit registration requests immediately so that the drug can be used in the public sector as soon as possible. Second, we want Abbott to work on finding interim solutions so they don't just file the dossier and then sit on their hands and we have to wait two years before the drug is registered. We need to make absolutely certain that strong interim measures are in place so that we can start using this drug as soon as possible. And then, finally, we need to make sure the drug is affordable. I understand that currently the market price for the drug in America is around nine-and-a-half thousand dollars. Now, that's a price that nobody in this country can afford and we need to make absolutely sure that the company is making firm guarantees to roll out this medicine at an affordable price.As I say, it's a drug that we need right now in our programs in South Africa, but we're going to be needing it even more because as the number of patients on treatment mature – and more and more patients have been on treatment over time – then more and more of those patients will have to move from the older medicines to the newer medicines. So it's an acute need for us now, but it will be an even greater need as time goes on. We're taking this course of action today because we see an ever increasing problem.Now the cornerstone drugs recommended from the World Health Organization (WHO) in second-line treatment are protease inhibitors (PI), like the lopinavir/ritonavir combination, marketed as Kaletra. A major advantage is that it has two PIs in one tablet, but the major problem with the old version is that it is not heat stable. So we are obliged to store it in the fridge. As soon as the medicine is taken out of the fridge, the company says we can only handle it under 25 degrees for six weeks. We fear that most of the time it is handled at more than 30 or 35 degrees — which means after some weeks the drug's activity goes down and we have seen it even clump together so the patient can't take the drug out of the boxes anymore.Right now we have about 100 patients in need of effective second-line treatment. And we project that by July 2006 we're going to have 140 patients. The problem is that they don't really have time, and so we need this heat-stable version of Kaletra now. We have so far reached one patient with the old version. Just to give you a practical example of how difficult it is, I'll mention his story. He really has no power at home because the power situation in Lagos is very difficult. So he needs to run generators and he has problems with the switches. So he stores the medicine in our clinic and comes on a daily basis to get his drugs. If we look into the 100 other patients in need of second-line drugs, then it becomes very, very difficult to make sure that the older version is stored under proper conditions. We really urge Abbott to make the thermal stable version available here. And as Nathan Ford mentioned before, it's ironic that African patients have no access to a second line drug designed for an African setting.MSF and many providers cannot provide the older Kaletra to many of our patients because they are too poor to buy it and the temperature in the area where we work is far above the recommended one. And we don't see how to offer better treatment to those who have enough money to buy it. So currently we are still using Nelfinavir. Of course Kaletra is better because the pill burden is less and there is no dietary restrictions — both factors that can sometimes interfere with our patients adhering to the treatment. So we really need this new heat-stable version of in Kenya.Regarding the price question, we're asking Abbott for a price no greater than the price they charge for the original formulation in developed countries, which is $500 per patient per year. We see no reason that the price for the new formulation should be above that and want the most affordable pricing for our patients and others.So, in other words, Gilead still has not even filed in many of the countries in Africa and they haven't even started that process. So I think we have a similar problem in terms of Gilead as we do with Abbott.